in the midway of this our mortal life ,
i found me in a gloomy wood , astray
gone from the path direct : and e'en to tell
it were no easy task , how savage wild
that forest , how robust and rough its growth ,
which to remember only , my dismay
renews , in bitterness not far from death .
yet to discourse of what there good befell ,
all else will i relate discover'd there .
how first i enter'd it i scarce can say ,
such sleepy dullness in that instant weigh'd
my senses down , when the true path i left ,
but when a mountain's foot i reach'd , where clos'd
the valley , that had pierc'd my heart with dread ,
i look'd aloft , and saw his shoulders broad
already vested with that planet's beam ,
who leads all wanderers safe through every way .
then was a little respite to the fear ,
that in my heart's recesses deep had lain ,
all of that night , so pitifully pass'd :
and as a man , with difficult short breath ,
forespent with toiling , 'scap'd from sea to shore ,
turns to the perilous wide waste , and stands
at gaze ; e'en so my spirit , that yet fail'd
struggling with terror , turn'd to view the straits ,
that none hath pass'd and liv'd . my weary frame
after short pause recomforted , again
i journey'd on over that lonely steep ,
the hinder foot still firmer . scarce the ascent
began , when , lo ! a panther , nimble , light ,
and cover'd with a speckled skin , appear'd ,
nor , when it saw me , vanish'd , rather strove
to check my onward going ; that ofttimes
with purpose to retrace my steps i turn'd .
the hour was morning's prime , and on his way
aloft the sun ascended with those stars ,
that with him rose , when love divine first mov'd
those its fair works : so that with joyous hope
all things conspir'd to fill me , the gay skin
of that swift animal , the matin dawn
and the sweet season . soon that joy was chas'd ,
and by new dread succeeded , when in view
a lion came , 'gainst me , as it appear'd ,
with his head held aloft and hunger - mad ,
that e'en the air was fear - struck . a she - wolf
was at his heels , who in her leanness seem'd
full of all wants , and many a land hath made
disconsolate ere now . she with such fear
o'erwhelmed me , at the sight of her appall'd ,
that of the height all hope i lost . as one ,
who with his gain elated , sees the time
when all unwares is gone , he inwardly
mourns with heart - griping anguish ; such was i ,
haunted by that fell beast , never at peace ,
who coming o'er against me , by degrees
impell'd me where the sun in silence rests .
while to the lower space with backward step
i fell , my ken discern'd the form one of one ,
whose voice seem'd faint through long disuse of speech .
when him in that great desert i espied ,
" have mercy on me ! " cried i out aloud ,
" spirit ! or living man ! what e'er thou be ! "
he answer'd : " now not man , man once i was ,
and born of lombard parents , mantuana both
by country , when the power of julius yet
was scarcely firm . at rome my life was past
beneath the mild augustus , in the time
of fabled deities and false . a bard
was i , and made anchises' upright son
the subject of my song , who came from troy ,
when the flames prey'd on ilium's haughty towers .
but thou , say wherefore to such perils past
return'st thou ? wherefore not this pleasant mount
ascendest , cause and source of all delight ? "
" and art thou then that virgil , that well - spring ,
from which such copious floods of eloquence
have issued ? " i with front abash'd replied .
" glory and light of all the tuneful train !
may it avail me that i long with zeal
have sought thy volume , and with love immense
have conn'd it o'er . my master thou and guide !
thou he from whom alone i have deriv'd
that style , which for its beauty into fame
exalts me . see the beast , from whom i fled .
o save me from her , thou illustrious sage ! "
" for every vein and pulse throughout my frame
she hath made tremble . " he , soon as he saw
that i was weeping , answer'd , " thou must needs
another way pursue , if thou wouldst 'scape
from out that savage wilderness . this beast ,
at whom thou criest , her way will suffer none
to pass , and no less hindrance makes than death :
so bad and so accursed in her kind ,
that never sated is her ravenous will ,
still after food more craving than before .
to many an animal in wedlock vile
she fastens , and shall yet to many more ,
until that greyhound come , who shall destroy
her with sharp pain . he will not life support
by earth nor its base metals , but by love ,
wisdom , and virtue , and his land shall be
the land 'twixt either feltro . in his might
shall safety to italia's plains arise ,
for whose fair realm , camilla , virgin pure ,
nisus , euryalus , and turnus fell .
he with incessant chase through every town
shall worry , until he to hell at length
restore her , thence by envy first let loose .
i for thy profit pond'ring now devise ,
that thou mayst follow me , and i thy guide
will lead thee hence through an eternal space ,
where thou shalt hear despairing shrieks , and see
spirits of old tormented , who invoke
a second death ; and those next view , who dwell
content in fire , for that they hope to come ,
whene'er the time may be , among the blest ,
into whose regions if thou then desire
t' ascend , a spirit worthier then i
must lead thee , in whose charge , when i depart ,
thou shalt be left : for that almighty king ,
who reigns above , a rebel to his law ,
adjudges me , and therefore hath decreed ,
that to his city none through me should come .
he in all parts hath sway ; there rules , there holds
his citadel and throne . o happy those ,
whom there he chooses ! " i to him in few :
" bard ! by that god , whom thou didst not adore ,
i do beseech thee ( that this ill and worse
i may escape ) to lead me , where thou saidst ,
that i saint peter's gate may view , and those
who as thou tell'st , are in such dismal plight . "
onward he mov'd , i close his steps pursu'd .
now was the day departing , and the air ,
imbrown'd with shadows , from their toils releas'd
all animals on earth ; and i alone
prepar'd myself the conflict to sustain ,
both of sad pity , and that perilous road ,
which my unerring memory shall retrace .
o muses ! o high genius ! now vouchsafe
your aid ! o mind ! that all i saw hast kept
safe in a written record , here thy worth
and eminent endowments come to proof .
i thus began : " bard ! thou who art my guide ,
consider well , if virtue be in me
sufficient , ere to this high enterprise
thou trust me . thou hast told that silvius' sire ,
yet cloth'd in corruptible flesh , among
th' immortal tribes had entrance , and was there
sensible present . yet if heaven's great lord ,
almighty foe to ill , such favour shew'd ,
in contemplation of the high effect ,
both what and who from him should issue forth ,
it seems in reason's judgment well deserv'd :
sith he of rome , and of rome's empire wide ,
in heaven's empyreal height was chosen sire :
both which , if truth be spoken , were ordain'd
and 'stablish'd for the holy place , where sits
who to great peter's sacred chair succeeds .
he from this journey , in thy song renown'd ,
learn'd things , that to his victory gave rise
and to the papal robe . in after - times
the chosen vessel also travel'd there ,
to bring us back assurance in that faith ,
which is the entrance to salvation's way .
but i , why should i there presume ? or who
permits it ? not , aeneas i nor paul .
myself i deem not worthy , and none else
will deem me . i , if on this voyage then
i venture , fear it will in folly end .
thou , who art wise , better my meaning know'st ,
than i can speak . " as one , who unresolves
what he hath late resolv'd , and with new thoughts
changes his purpose , from his first intent
remov'd ; e'en such was i on that dun coast ,
wasting in thought my enterprise , at first
so eagerly embrac'd . " if right thy words
i scan , " replied that shade magnanimous ,
" thy soul is by vile fear assail'd , which oft
so overcasts a man , that he recoils
from noblest resolution , like a beast
at some false semblance in the twilight gloom .
that from this terror thou mayst free thyself ,
i will instruct thee why i came , and what
i heard in that same instant , when for thee
grief touch'd me first . i was among the tribe ,
who rest suspended , when a dame , so blest
and lovely , i besought her to command ,
call'd me ; her eyes were brighter than the star
of day ; and she with gentle voice and soft
angelically tun'd her speech address'd :
" o courteous shade of mantua ! thou whose fame
yet lives , and shall live long as nature lasts !
a friend , not of my fortune but myself ,
on the wide desert in his road has met
hindrance so great , that he through fear has turn'd .
now much i dread lest he past help have stray'd ,
and i be ris'n too late for his relief ,
from what in heaven of him i heard . speed now ,
and by thy eloquent persuasive tongue ,
and by all means for his deliverance meet ,
assist him . so to me will comfort spring .
i who now bid thee on this errand forth
am beatrice ; from a place i come
( note : beatrice . i use this word , as it is
pronounced in the italian , as consisting of four
syllables , of which the third is a long one . )
revisited with joy . love brought me thence ,
who prompts my speech . when in my master's sight
i stand , thy praise to him i oft will tell . "
she then was silent , and i thus began :
" o lady ! by whose influence alone ,
mankind excels whatever is contain'd
within that heaven which hath the smallest orb ,
so thy command delights me , that to obey ,
if it were done already , would seem late .
no need hast thou farther to speak thy will ;
yet tell the reason , why thou art not loth
to leave that ample space , where to return
thou burnest , for this centre here beneath . "
she then : " since thou so deeply wouldst inquire ,
i will instruct thee briefly , why no dread
hinders my entrance here . those things alone
are to be fear'd , whence evil may proceed ,
none else , for none are terrible beside .
i am so fram'd by god , thanks to his grace !
that any suff'rance of your misery
touches me not , nor flame of that fierce fire
assails me . in high heaven a blessed dame
besides , who mourns with such effectual grief
that hindrance , which i send thee to remove ,
that god's stern judgment to her will inclines . "
to lucia calling , her she thus bespake :
" now doth thy faithful servant need thy aid
and i commend him to thee . " at her word
sped lucia , of all cruelty the foe ,
and coming to the place , where i abode
seated with rachel , her of ancient days ,
she thus address'd me : " thou true praise of god !
beatrice ! why is not thy succour lent
to him , who so much lov'd thee , as to leave
for thy sake all the multitude admires ?
dost thou not hear how pitiful his wail ,
nor mark the death , which in the torrent flood ,
swoln mightier than a sea , him struggling holds ? "
" ne'er among men did any with such speed
haste to their profit , flee from their annoy ,
as when these words were spoken , i came here ,
down from my blessed seat , trusting the force
of thy pure eloquence , which thee , and all
who well have mark'd it , into honour brings . "
" when she had ended , her bright beaming eyes
tearful she turn'd aside ; whereat i felt
redoubled zeal to serve thee . as she will'd ,
thus am i come : i sav'd thee from the beast ,
who thy near way across the goodly mount
prevented . what is this comes o'er thee then ?
why , why dost thou hang back ? why in thy breast
harbour vile fear ? why hast not courage there
and noble daring ? since three maids so blest
thy safety plan , e'en in the court of heaven ;
and so much certain good my words forebode . "
as florets , by the frosty air of night
bent down and clos'd , when day has blanch'd their leaves ,
rise all unfolded on their spiry stems ;
so was my fainting vigour new restor'd ,
and to my heart such kindly courage ran ,
that i as one undaunted soon replied :
" o full of pity she , who undertook
my succour ! and thou kind who didst perform
so soon her true behest ! with such desire
thou hast dispos'd me to renew my voyage ,
that my first purpose fully is resum'd .
lead on : one only will is in us both .
thou art my guide , my master thou , and lord . "
so spake i ; and when he had onward mov'd ,
i enter'd on the deep and woody way .
" through me you pass into the city of woe :
through me you pass into eternal pain :
through me among the people lost for aye .
justice the founder of my fabric mov'd :
to rear me was the task of power divine ,
supremest wisdom , and primeval love .
before me things create were none , save things
eternal , and eternal i endure .
" all hope abandon ye who enter here . "
such characters in colour dim i mark'd
over a portal's lofty arch inscrib'd :
whereat i thus : " master , these words import
hard meaning . " he as one prepar'd replied :
" here thou must all distrust behind thee leave ;
here be vile fear extinguish'd . we are come
where i have told thee we shall see the souls
to misery doom'd , who intellectual good
have lost . " and when his hand he had stretch'd forth
to mine , with pleasant looks , whence i was cheer'd ,
into that secret place he led me on .
here sighs with lamentations and loud moans
resounded through the air pierc'd by no star ,
that e'en i wept at entering . various tongues ,
horrible languages , outcries of woe ,
accents of anger , voices deep and hoarse ,
with hands together smote that swell'd the sounds ,
made up a tumult , that for ever whirls
round through that air with solid darkness stain'd ,
like to the sand that in the whirlwind flies .
i then , with error yet encompass'd , cried :
" o master ! what is this i hear ? what race
are these , who seem so overcome with woe ? "
he thus to me : " this miserable fate
suffer the wretched souls of those , who liv'd
without or praise or blame , with that ill band
of angels mix'd , who nor rebellious prov'd
nor yet were true to god , but for themselves
were only . from his bounds heaven drove them forth ,
not to impair his lustre , nor the depth
of hell receives them , lest th' accursed tribe
should glory thence with exultation vain . "
i then : " master ! what doth aggrieve them thus ,
that they lament so loud ? " he straight replied :
" that will i tell thee briefly . these of death
no hope may entertain : and their blind life
so meanly passes , that all other lots
they envy . fame of them the world hath none ,
nor suffers ; mercy and justice scorn them both .
speak not of them , but look , and pass them by . "
and i , who straightway look'd , beheld a flag ,
which whirling ran around so rapidly ,
that it no pause obtain'd : and following came
such a long train of spirits , i should ne'er
have thought , that death so many had despoil'd .
when some of these i recogniz'd , i saw
and knew the shade of him , who to base fear
yielding , abjur'd his high estate . forthwith
i understood for certain this the tribe
of those ill spirits both to god displeasing
and to his foes . these wretches , who ne'er lived ,
went on in nakedness , and sorely stung
by wasps and hornets , which bedew'd their cheeks
with blood , that mix'd with tears dropp'd to their feet ,
and by disgustful worms was gather'd there .
then looking farther onwards i beheld
a throng upon the shore of a great stream :
whereat i thus : " sir ! grant me now to know
whom here we view , and whence impell'd they seem
so eager to pass o'er , as i discern
through the blear light ? " he thus to me in few :
" this shalt thou know , soon as our steps arrive
beside the woeful tide of acheron . "
then with eyes downward cast and fill'd with shame ,
fearing my words offensive to his ear ,
till we had reach'd the river , i from speech
abstain'd . and lo ! toward us in a bark
comes on an old man hoary white with eld ,
crying , " woe to you wicked spirits ! hope not
ever to see the sky again . i come
to take you to the other shore across ,
into eternal darkness , there to dwell
in fierce heat and in ice . and thou , who there
standest , live spirit ! get thee hence , and leave
these who are dead . " but soon as he beheld
i left them not , " by other way , " said he ,
" by other haven shalt thou come to shore ,
not by this passage ; thee a nimbler boat
must carry . " then to him thus spake my guide :
" charon ! thyself torment not : so 't is will'd ,
where will and power are one : ask thou no more . "
straightway in silence fell the shaggy cheeks
of him the boatman o'er the livid lake ,
around whose eyes glar'd wheeling flames . meanwhile
those spirits , faint and naked , color chang'd ,
and gnash'd their teeth , soon as the cruel words
they heard . god and their parents they blasphem'd ,
the human kind , the place , the time , and seed
that did engender them and give them birth .
then all together sorely wailing drew
to the curs'd strand , that every man must pass
who fears not god . charon , demoniac form ,
with eyes of burning coal , collects them all ,
beck'ning , and each , that lingers , with his oar
strikes . as fall off the light autumnal leaves ,
one still another following , till the bough
strews all its honours on the earth beneath ;
e'en in like manner adam's evil brood
cast themselves one by one down from the shore ,
each at a beck , as falcon at his call .
thus go they over through the umber'd wave ,
and ever they on the opposing bank
be landed , on this side another throng
still gathers . " son , " thus spake the courteous guide ,
" those , who die subject to the wrath of god ,
all here together come from every clime ,
and to o'erpass the river are not loth :
for so heaven's justice goads them on , that fear
is turn'd into desire . hence ne'er hath past
good spirit . if of thee charon complain ,
now mayst thou know the import of his words . "
this said , the gloomy region trembling shook
so terribly , that yet with clammy dews
fear chills my brow . the sad earth gave a blast ,
that , lightening , shot forth a vermilion flame ,
which all my senses conquer'd quite , and i
down dropp'd , as one with sudden slumber seiz'd .
broke the deep slumber in my brain a crash
of heavy thunder , that i shook myself ,
as one by main force rous'd . risen upright ,
my rested eyes i mov'd around , and search'd
with fixed ken to know what place it was ,
wherein i stood . for certain on the brink
i found me of the lamentable vale ,
the dread abyss , that joins a thund'rous sound
of plaints innumerable . dark and deep ,
and thick with clouds o'erspread , mine eye in vain
explor'd its bottom , nor could aught discern .
" now let us to the blind world there beneath
descend ; " the bard began all pale of look :
" i go the first , and thou shalt follow next . "
then i his alter'd hue perceiving , thus :
" how may i speed , if thou yieldest to dread ,
who still art wont to comfort me in doubt ? "
he then : " the anguish of that race below
with pity stains my cheek , which thou for fear
mistakest . let us on . our length of way
urges to haste . " onward , this said , he mov'd ;
and ent'ring led me with him on the bounds
of the first circle , that surrounds th' abyss .
here , as mine ear could note , no plaint was heard
except of sighs , that made th' eternal air
tremble , not caus'd by tortures , but from grief
felt by those multitudes , many and vast ,
of men , women , and infants . then to me
the gentle guide : " inquir'st thou not what spirits
are these , which thou beholdest ? ere thou pass
farther , i would thou know , that these of sin
were blameless ; and if aught they merited ,
it profits not , since baptism was not theirs ,
the portal to thy faith . if they before
the gospel liv'd , they serv'd not god aright ;
and among such am i . for these defects ,
and for no other evil , we are lost ; "
" only so far afflicted , that we live
desiring without hope . " so grief assail'd
my heart at hearing this , for well i knew
suspended in that limbo many a soul
of mighty worth . " o tell me , sire rever'd !
tell me , my master ! " i began through wish
of full assurance in that holy faith ,
which vanquishes all error ; " say , did e'er
any , or through his own or other's merit ,
come forth from thence , whom afterward was blest ? "
piercing the secret purport of my speech ,
he answer'd : " i was new to that estate ,
when i beheld a puissant one arrive
amongst us , with victorious trophy crown'd .
he forth the shade of our first parent drew ,
abel his child , and noah righteous man ,
of moses lawgiver for faith approv'd ,
of patriarch abraham , and david king ,
israel with his sire and with his sons ,
nor without rachel whom so hard he won ,
and others many more , whom he to bliss
exalted . before these , be thou assur'd ,
no spirit of human kind was ever sav'd . "
we , while he spake , ceas'd not our onward road ,
still passing through the wood ; for so i name
those spirits thick beset . we were not far
on this side from the summit , when i kenn'd
a flame , that o'er the darken'd hemisphere
prevailing shin'd . yet we a little space
were distant , not so far but i in part
discover'd , that a tribe in honour high
that place possess'd . " o thou , who every art
and science valu'st ! who are these , that boast
such honour , separate from all the rest ? "
he answer'd : " the renown of their great names
that echoes through your world above , acquires
favour in heaven , which holds them thus advanc'd . "
meantime a voice i heard : " honour the bard
sublime ! his shade returns that left us late ! "
no sooner ceas'd the sound , than i beheld
four mighty spirits toward us bend their steps ,
of semblance neither sorrowful nor glad .
when thus my master kind began : " mark him ,
who in his right hand bears that falchion keen ,
the other three preceding , as their lord .
this is that homer , of all bards supreme :
flaccus the next in satire's vein excelling ;
the third is naso ; lucan is the last .
because they all that appellation own ,
with which the voice singly accosted me ,
honouring they greet me thus , and well they judge . "
so i beheld united the bright school
of him the monarch of sublimest song ,
that o'er the others like an eagle soars .
when they together short discourse had held ,
they turn'd to me , with salutation kind
beck'ning me ; at the which my master smil'd :
nor was this all ; but greater honour still
they gave me , for they made me of their tribe ;
and i was sixth amid so learn'd a band .
far as the luminous beacon on we pass'd
speaking of matters , then befitting well
to speak , now fitter left untold . at foot
of a magnificent castle we arriv'd ,
seven times with lofty walls begirt , and round
defended by a pleasant stream . o'er this
as o'er dry land we pass'd . next through seven gates
i with those sages enter'd , and we came
into a mead with lively verdure fresh .
there dwelt a race , who slow their eyes around
majestically mov'd , and in their port
bore eminent authority ; they spake
seldom , but all their words were tuneful sweet .
we to one side retir'd , into a place
open and bright and lofty , whence each one
stood manifest to view . incontinent
there on the green enamel of the plain
were shown me the great spirits , by whose sight
i am exalted in my own esteem .
electra there i saw accompanied
by many , among whom hector i knew ,
anchises' pious son , and with hawk's eye
caesar all arm'd , and by camilla there
penthesilea . on the other side
old king latinus , seated by his child
lavinia , and that brutus i beheld ,
who tarquin chas'd , lucretia , cato's wife
marcia , with julia and cornelia there ;
and sole apart retir'd , the soldan fierce .
then when a little more i rais'd my brow ,
i spied the master of the sapient throng ,
seated amid the philosophic train .
him all admire , all pay him rev'rence due .
there socrates and plato both i mark'd ,
nearest to him in rank ; democritus ,
who sets the world at chance , diogenes ,
with heraclitus , and empedocles ,
and anaxagoras , and thales sage ,
zeno , and dioscorides well read
in nature's secret lore . orpheus i mark'd
and linus , tully and moral seneca ,
euclid and ptolemy , hippocrates ,
galenus , avicen , and him who made
that commentary vast , averroes .
of all to speak at full were vain attempt ;
for my wide theme so urges , that ofttimes
my words fall short of what bechanc'd . in two
the six associates part . another way
my sage guide leads me , from that air serene ,
into a climate ever vex'd with storms :
and to a part i come where no light shines .
from the first circle i descended thus
down to the second , which , a lesser space
embracing , so much more of grief contains
provoking bitter moans . there , minos stands
grinning with ghastly feature : he , of all
who enter , strict examining the crimes ,
gives sentence , and dismisses them beneath ,
according as he foldeth him around :
for when before him comes th' ill fated soul ,
it all confesses ; and that judge severe
of sins , considering what place in hell
suits the transgression , with his tail so oft
himself encircles , as degrees beneath
he dooms it to descend . before him stand
always a num'rous throng ; and in his turn
each one to judgment passing , speaks , and hears
his fate , thence downward to his dwelling hurl'd .
" o thou ! who to this residence of woe
approachest ? " when he saw me coming , cried
minos , relinquishing his dread employ ,
" look how thou enter here ; beware in whom
thou place thy trust ; let not the entrance broad
deceive thee to thy harm . " to him my guide :
" wherefore exclaimest ? hinder not his way
by destiny appointed ; so 'tis will'd
where will and power are one . ask thou no more . "
now 'gin the rueful wailings to be heard .
now am i come where many a plaining voice
smites on mine ear . into a place i came
where light was silent all . bellowing there groan'd
a noise as of a sea in tempest torn
by warring winds . the stormy blast of hell
with restless fury drives the spirits on
whirl'd round and dash'd amain with sore annoy .
when they arrive before the ruinous sweep ,
there shrieks are heard , there lamentations , moans ,
and blasphemies 'gainst the good power in heaven .
i understood that to this torment sad
the carnal sinners are condemn'd , in whom
reason by lust is sway'd . as in large troops
and multitudinous , when winter reigns ,
the starlings on their wings are borne abroad ;
so bears the tyrannous gust those evil souls .
on this side and on that , above , below ,
it drives them : hope of rest to solace them
is none , nor e'en of milder pang . as cranes ,
chanting their dol'rous notes , traverse the sky ,
stretch'd out in long array : so i beheld
spirits , who came loud wailing , hurried on
by their dire doom . then i : " instructor ! who
are these , by the black air so scourg'd ? " -- " the first
'mong those , of whom thou question'st , " he replied ,
" o'er many tongues was empress . she in vice
of luxury was so shameless , that she made
liking be lawful by promulg'd decree ,
to clear the blame she had herself incurr'd .
this is semiramis , of whom 'tis writ ,
that she succeeded ninus her espous'd ;
and held the land , which now the soldan rules .
the next in amorous fury slew herself ,
and to sicheus' ashes broke her faith :
then follows cleopatra , lustful queen . "
there mark'd i helen , for whose sake so long
the time was fraught with evil ; there the great
achilles , who with love fought to the end .
paris i saw , and tristan ; and beside
a thousand more he show'd me , and by name
pointed them out , whom love bereav'd of life .
when i had heard my sage instructor name
those dames and knights of antique days , o'erpower'd
by pity , well - nigh in amaze my mind
was lost ; and i began : " bard ! willingly
i would address those two together coming ,
which seem so light before the wind . " he thus :
" note thou , when nearer they to us approach . "
" then by that love which carries them along ,
entreat ; and they will come . " soon as the wind
sway'd them toward us , i thus fram'd my speech :
" o wearied spirits ! come , and hold discourse
with us , if by none else restrain'd . " as doves
by fond desire invited , on wide wings
and firm , to their sweet nest returning home ,
cleave the air , wafted by their will along ;
thus issu'd from that troop , where dido ranks ,
they through the ill air speeding ; with such force
my cry prevail'd by strong affection urg'd .
" o gracious creature and benign ! who go'st
visiting , through this element obscure ,
us , who the world with bloody stain imbru'd ;
if for a friend the king of all we own'd ,
our pray'r to him should for thy peace arise ,
since thou hast pity on our evil plight .
( ) f whatsoe'er to hear or to discourse
it pleases thee , that will we hear , of that
freely with thee discourse , while e'er the wind ,
as now , is mute . the land , that gave me birth ,
is situate on the coast , where po descends
to rest in ocean with his sequent streams .
" love , that in gentle heart is quickly learnt ,
entangled him by that fair form , from me
ta'en in such cruel sort , as grieves me still :
love , that denial takes from none belov'd ,
caught me with pleasing him so passing well ,
that , as thou see'st , he yet deserts me not .
" love brought us to one death : caina waits
the soul , who spilt our life . " such were their words ;
at hearing which downward i bent my looks ,
and held them there so long , that the bard cried :
" what art thou pond'ring ? " i in answer thus :
" alas ! by what sweet thoughts , what fond desire
must they at length to that ill pass have reach'd ! "
then turning , i to them my speech address'd .
and thus began : " francesca ! your sad fate
even to tears my grief and pity moves .
but tell me ; in the time of your sweet sighs ,
by what , and how love granted , that ye knew
your yet uncertain wishes ? " she replied :
" no greater grief than to remember days
of joy , when mis'ry is at hand ! that kens
thy learn'd instructor . yet so eagerly
if thou art bent to know the primal root ,
from whence our love gat being , i will do ,
as one , who weeps and tells his tale . one day
for our delight we read of lancelot ,
how him love thrall'd . alone we were , and no
suspicion near us . ofttimes by that reading
our eyes were drawn together , and the hue
fled from our alter'd cheek . but at one point
alone we fell . when of that smile we read ,
the wished smile , rapturously kiss'd
by one so deep in love , then he , who ne'er
from me shall separate , at once my lips
all trembling kiss'd . the book and writer both
were love's purveyors . in its leaves that day
we read no more . " while thus one spirit spake ,
the other wail'd so sorely , that heartstruck
i through compassion fainting , seem'd not far
from death , and like a corpse fell to the ground .
my sense reviving , that erewhile had droop'd
with pity for the kindred shades , whence grief
o'ercame me wholly , straight around i see
new torments , new tormented souls , which way
soe'er i move , or turn , or bend my sight .
in the third circle i arrive , of show'rs
ceaseless , accursed , heavy , and cold , unchang'd
for ever , both in kind and in degree .
large hail , discolour'd water , sleety flaw
through the dun midnight air stream'd down amain :
stank all the land whereon that tempest fell .
cerberus , cruel monster , fierce and strange ,
through his wide threefold throat barks as a dog
over the multitude immers'd beneath .
his eyes glare crimson , black his unctuous beard ,
his belly large , and claw'd the hands , with which
he tears the spirits , flays them , and their limbs
piecemeal disparts . howling there spread , as curs ,
under the rainy deluge , with one side
the other screening , oft they roll them round ,
a wretched , godless crew . when that great worm
descried us , savage cerberus , he op'd
his jaws , and the fangs show'd us ; not a limb
of him but trembled . then my guide , his palms
expanding on the ground , thence filled with earth
rais'd them , and cast it in his ravenous maw .
e'en as a dog , that yelling bays for food
his keeper , when the morsel comes , lets fall
his fury , bent alone with eager haste
to swallow it ; so dropp'd the loathsome cheeks
of demon cerberus , who thund'ring stuns
the spirits , that they for deafness wish in vain .
we , o'er the shades thrown prostrate by the brunt
of the heavy tempest passing , set our feet
upon their emptiness , that substance seem'd .
they all along the earth extended lay
save one , that sudden rais'd himself to sit ,
soon as that way he saw us pass . " o thou ! "
he cried , " who through the infernal shades art led ,
own , if again thou know'st me . thou wast fram'd
or ere my frame was broken . " i replied :
" the anguish thou endur'st perchance so takes
thy form from my remembrance , that it seems
as if i saw thee never . but inform
me who thou art , that in a place so sad
art set , and in such torment , that although
other be greater , more disgustful none
can be imagin'd . " he in answer thus :
" thy city heap'd with envy to the brim ,
ay that the measure overflows its bounds ,
held me in brighter days . ye citizens
were wont to name me ciacco . for the sin
of glutt'ny , damned vice , beneath this rain ,
e'en as thou see'st , i with fatigue am worn ;
nor i sole spirit in this woe : all these
have by like crime incurr'd like punishment . "
no more he said , and i my speech resum'd :
" ciacco ! thy dire affliction grieves me much ,
even to tears . but tell me , if thou know'st ,
what shall at length befall the citizens
of the divided city ; whether any just one
inhabit there : and tell me of the cause ,
whence jarring discord hath assail'd it thus ? "
he then : " after long striving they will come
to blood ; and the wild party from the woods
will chase the other with much injury forth .
then it behoves , that this must fall , within
three solar circles ; and the other rise
by borrow'd force of one , who under shore
now rests . it shall a long space hold aloof
its forehead , keeping under heavy weight
the other oppress'd , indignant at the load ,
and grieving sore . the just are two in number ,
but they neglected . av'rice , envy , pride ,
three fatal sparks , have set the hearts of all
on fire . " here ceas'd the lamentable sound ;
and i continu'd thus : " still would i learn
more from thee , farther parley still entreat .
of farinata and tegghiaio say ,
they who so well deserv'd , of giacopo ,
arrigo , mosca , and the rest , who bent
their minds on working good . oh ! tell me where
they bide , and to their knowledge let me come .
for i am press'd with keen desire to hear ,
if heaven's sweet cup or poisonous drug of hell
be to their lip assign'd . " he answer'd straight :
" these are yet blacker spirits . various crimes
have sunk them deeper in the dark abyss .
if thou so far descendest , thou mayst see them .
but to the pleasant world when thou return'st ,
of me make mention , i entreat thee , there .
no more i tell thee , answer thee no more . "
this said , his fixed eyes he turn'd askance ,
a little ey'd me , then bent down his head ,
and 'midst his blind companions with it fell .
when thus my guide : " no more his bed he leaves ,
ere the last angel - trumpet blow . the power
adverse to these shall then in glory come ,
each one forthwith to his sad tomb repair ,
resume his fleshly vesture and his form ,
and hear the eternal doom re - echoing rend
the vault . " so pass'd we through that mixture foul
of spirits and rain , with tardy steps ; meanwhile
touching , though slightly , on the life to come .
for thus i question'd : " shall these tortures , sir !
when the great sentence passes , be increas'd ,
or mitigated , or as now severe ? "
he then : " consult thy knowledge ; that decides
that as each thing to more perfection grows ,
it feels more sensibly both good and pain .
though ne'er to true perfection may arrive
this race accurs'd , yet nearer then than now
they shall approach it . " compassing that path
circuitous we journeyed , and discourse
much more than i relate between us pass'd :
till at the point , where the steps led below ,
arriv'd , there plutus , the great foe , we found .
" ah me ! o satan ! satan ! " loud exclaim'd
plutus , in accent hoarse of wild alarm :
and the kind sage , whom no event surpris'd ,
to comfort me thus spake : " let not thy fear
harm thee , for power in him , be sure , is none
to hinder down this rock thy safe descent . "
then to that sworn lip turning , " peace ! " he cried ,
" curs'd wolf ! thy fury inward on thyself
prey , and consume thee ! through the dark profound
not without cause he passes . so 't is will'd
on high , there where the great archangel pour'd
heav'n's vengeance on the first adulterer proud . "
as sails full spread and bellying with the wind
drop suddenly collaps'd , if the mast split ;
so to the ground down dropp'd the cruel fiend .
thus we , descending to the fourth steep ledge ,
gain'd on the dismal shore , that all the woe
hems in of all the universe . ah me !
almighty justice ! in what store thou heap'st
new pains , new troubles , as i here beheld !
wherefore doth fault of ours bring us to this ?
e'en as a billow , on charybdis rising ,
against encounter'd billow dashing breaks ;
such is the dance this wretched race must lead ,
whom more than elsewhere numerous here i found ,
from one side and the other , with loud voice ,
both roll'd on weights by main forge of their breasts ,
then smote together , and each one forthwith
roll'd them back voluble , turning again ,
exclaiming these , " why holdest thou so fast ? "
those answering , " and why castest thou away ? "
so still repeating their despiteful song ,
they to the opposite point on either hand
travers'd the horrid circle : then arriv'd ,
both turn'd them round , and through the middle space
conflicting met again . at sight whereof
i , stung with grief , thus spake : " o say , my guide !
what race is this ? were these , whose heads are shorn ,
on our left hand , all sep'rate to the church ? "
he straight replied : " in their first life these all
in mind were so distorted , that they made ,
according to due measure , of their wealth ,
no use . this clearly from their words collect ,
which they howl forth , at each extremity
arriving of the circle , where their crime
contrary' in kind disparts them . to the church
were separate those , that with no hairy cowls
are crown'd , both popes and cardinals , o'er whom
av'rice dominion absolute maintains . "
i then : " mid such as these some needs must be ,
whom i shall recognize , that with the blot
of these foul sins were stain'd . " he answering thus :
" vain thought conceiv'st thou . that ignoble life ,
which made them vile before , now makes them dark ,
and to all knowledge indiscernible .
forever they shall meet in this rude shock :
these from the tomb with clenched grasp shall rise ,
those with close - shaven locks . that ill they gave ,
and ill they kept , hath of the beauteous world
depriv'd , and set them at this strife , which needs
no labour'd phrase of mine to set if off .
now may'st thou see , my son ! how brief , how vain ,
the goods committed into fortune's hands ,
for which the human race keep such a coil !
not all the gold , that is beneath the moon ,
or ever hath been , of these toil - worn souls
might purchase rest for one . " i thus rejoin'd :
" my guide ! of thee this also would i learn ;
this fortune , that thou speak'st of , what it is ,
whose talons grasp the blessings of the world ? "
he thus : " o beings blind ! what ignorance
besets you ? now my judgment hear and mark .
he , whose transcendent wisdom passes all ,
the heavens creating , gave them ruling powers
to guide them , so that each part shines to each ,
their light in equal distribution pour'd .
by similar appointment he ordain'd
over the world's bright images to rule .
superintendence of a guiding hand
and general minister , which at due time
may change the empty vantages of life
from race to race , from one to other's blood ,
beyond prevention of man's wisest care :
wherefore one nation rises into sway ,
another languishes , e'en as her will
decrees , from us conceal'd , as in the grass
the serpent train . against her nought avails
your utmost wisdom . she with foresight plans ,
judges , and carries on her reign , as theirs
the other powers divine . her changes know
nore intermission : by necessity
she is made swift , so frequent come who claim
succession in her favours . this is she ,
so execrated e'en by those , whose debt
to her is rather praise ; they wrongfully
with blame requite her , and with evil word ;
but she is blessed , and for that recks not :
amidst the other primal beings glad
rolls on her sphere , and in her bliss exults .
now on our way pass we , to heavier woe
descending : for each star is falling now ,
that mounted at our entrance , and forbids
too long our tarrying . " we the circle cross'd
to the next steep , arriving at a well ,
that boiling pours itself down to a foss
sluic'd from its source . far murkier was the wave
than sablest grain : and we in company
of the' inky waters , journeying by their side ,
enter'd , though by a different track , beneath .
into a lake , the stygian nam'd , expands
the dismal stream , when it hath reach'd the foot
of the grey wither'd cliffs . intent i stood
to gaze , and in the marish sunk descried
a miry tribe , all naked , and with looks
betok'ning rage . they with their hands alone
struck not , but with the head , the breast , the feet ,
cutting each other piecemeal with their fangs .
the good instructor spake ; " now seest thou , son !
the souls of those , whom anger overcame .
this too for certain know , that underneath
the water dwells a multitude , whose sighs
into these bubbles make the surface heave ,
as thine eye tells thee wheresoe'er it turn . "
fix'd in the slime they say : " sad once were we
in the sweet air made gladsome by the sun ,
carrying a foul and lazy mist within :
now in these murky settlings are we sad . "
such dolorous strain they gurgle in their throats .
but word distinct can utter none . " our route
thus compass'd we , a segment widely stretch'd
between the dry embankment , and the core
of the loath'd pool , turning meanwhile our eyes
downward on those who gulp'd its muddy lees ;
nor stopp'd , till to a tower's low base we came .
my theme pursuing , i relate that ere
we reach'd the lofty turret's base , our eyes
its height ascended , where two cressets hung
we mark'd , and from afar another light
return the signal , so remote , that scarce
the eye could catch its beam . i turning round
to the deep source of knowledge , thus inquir'd :
" say what this means ? and what that other light
in answer set ? what agency doth this ? "
" there on the filthy waters , " he replied ,
" e'en now what next awaits us mayst thou see ,
if the marsh - gender'd fog conceal it not . "
never was arrow from the cord dismiss'd ,
that ran its way so nimbly through the air ,
as a small bark , that through the waves i spied
toward us coming , under the sole sway
of one that ferried it , who cried aloud :
" art thou arriv'd , fell spirit ? " -- " phlegyas , phlegyas ,
this time thou criest in vain , " my lord replied ;
" no longer shalt thou have us , but while o'er
the slimy pool we pass . " as one who hears
of some great wrong he hath sustain'd , whereat
inly he pines ; so phlegyas inly pin'd
in his fierce ire . my guide descending stepp'd
into the skiff , and bade me enter next
close at his side ; nor till my entrance seem'd
the vessel freighted . soon as both embark'd ,
cutting the waves , goes on the ancient prow ,
more deeply than with others it is wont .
while we our course o'er the dead channel held .
one drench'd in mire before me came , and said ;
" who art thou , that thou comest ere thine hour ? "
i answer'd : " though i come , i tarry not ;
but who art thou , that art become so foul ? "
" one , as thou seest , who mourn : " he straight replied .
to which i thus : " in mourning and in woe ,
curs'd spirit ! tarry thou . g i know thee well ,
e'en thus in filth disguis'd . " then stretch'd he forth
hands to the bark ; whereof my teacher sage
aware , thrusting him back : " away ! down there ;
" to the' other dogs ! " then , with his arms my neck
encircling , kiss'd my cheek , and spake : " o soul
justly disdainful ! blest was she in whom
thou was conceiv'd ! he in the world was one
for arrogance noted ; to his memory
no virtue lends its lustre ; even so
here is his shadow furious . there above
how many now hold themselves mighty kings
who here like swine shall wallow in the mire ,
leaving behind them horrible dispraise ! "
i then : " master ! him fain would i behold
whelm'd in these dregs , before we quit the lake . "
he thus : " or ever to thy view the shore
be offer'd , satisfied shall be that wish ,
which well deserves completion . " scarce his words
were ended , when i saw the miry tribes
set on him with such violence , that yet
for that render i thanks to god and praise
" to filippo argenti : " cried they all :
and on himself the moody florentine
turn'd his avenging fangs . him here we left ,
nor speak i of him more . but on mine ear
sudden a sound of lamentation smote ,
whereat mine eye unbarr'd i sent abroad .
and thus the good instructor : " now , my son !
draws near the city , that of dis is nam'd ,
with its grave denizens , a mighty throng . "
i thus : " the minarets already , sir !
there certes in the valley i descry ,
gleaming vermilion , as if they from fire
had issu'd . " he replied : " eternal fire ,
that inward burns , shows them with ruddy flame
illum'd ; as in this nether hell thou seest . "
we came within the fosses deep , that moat
this region comfortless . the walls appear'd
as they were fram'd of iron . we had made
wide circuit , ere a place we reach'd , where loud
the mariner cried vehement : " go forth !
the' entrance is here ! " upon the gates i spied
more than a thousand , who of old from heaven
were hurl'd . with ireful gestures , " who is this , "
they cried , " that without death first felt , goes through
the regions of the dead ? " my sapient guide
made sign that he for secret parley wish'd ;
whereat their angry scorn abating , thus
they spake : " come thou alone ; and let him go
who hath so hardily enter'd this realm .
alone return he by his witless way ;
if well he know it , let him prove . for thee ,
here shalt thou tarry , who through clime so dark
hast been his escort . " now bethink thee , reader !
what cheer was mine at sound of those curs'd words .
i did believe i never should return .
" o my lov'd guide ! who more than seven times
security hast render'd me , and drawn
from peril deep , whereto i stood expos'd ,
desert me not , " i cried , " in this extreme .
and if our onward going be denied ,
together trace we back our steps with speed . "
my liege , who thither had conducted me ,
replied : " fear not : for of our passage none
hath power to disappoint us , by such high
authority permitted . but do thou
expect me here ; meanwhile thy wearied spirit
comfort , and feed with kindly hope , assur'd
i will not leave thee in this lower world . "
this said , departs the sire benevolent ,
and quits me . hesitating i remain
at war 'twixt will and will not in my thoughts .
i could not hear what terms he offer'd them ,
but they conferr'd not long , for all at once
to trial fled within . clos'd were the gates
by those our adversaries on the breast
of my liege lord : excluded he return'd
to me with tardy steps . upon the ground
his eyes were bent , and from his brow eras'd
all confidence , while thus with sighs he spake :
" who hath denied me these abodes of woe ? "
then thus to me : " that i am anger'd , think
no ground of terror : in this trial i
shall vanquish , use what arts they may within
for hindrance . this their insolence , not new ,
erewhile at gate less secret they display'd ,
which still is without bolt ; upon its arch
thou saw'st the deadly scroll : and even now
on this side of its entrance , down the steep ,
passing the circles , unescorted , comes
one whose strong might can open us this land . "
the hue , which coward dread on my pale cheeks
imprinted , when i saw my guide turn back ,
chas'd that from his which newly they had worn ,
and inwardly restrain'd it . he , as one
who listens , stood attentive : for his eye
not far could lead him through the sable air ,
and the thick - gath'ring cloud . " it yet behooves
we win this fight " -- thus he began -- " if not --
such aid to us is offer'd . -- oh , how long
me seems it , ere the promis'd help arrive ! "
i noted , how the sequel of his words
clok'd their beginning ; for the last he spake
agreed not with the first . but not the less
my fear was at his saying ; sith i drew
to import worse perchance , than that he held ,
his mutilated speech . " doth ever any
into this rueful concave's extreme depth
descend , out of the first degree , whose pain
is deprivation merely of sweet hope ? "
thus i inquiring . " rarely , " he replied ,
" it chances , that among us any makes
this journey , which i wend . erewhile 'tis true
once came i here beneath , conjur'd by fell
erictho , sorceress , who compell'd the shades
back to their bodies . no long space my flesh
was naked of me , when within these walls
she made me enter , to draw forth a spirit
from out of judas' circle . lowest place
is that of all , obscurest , and remov'd
farthest from heav'n's all - circling orb . the road
full well i know : thou therefore rest secure .
that lake , the noisome stench exhaling , round
the city' of grief encompasses , which now
we may not enter without rage . " yet more
he added : but i hold it not in mind ,
for that mine eye toward the lofty tower
had drawn me wholly , to its burning top .
where in an instant i beheld uprisen
at once three hellish furies stain'd with blood :
in limb and motion feminine they seem'd ;
around them greenest hydras twisting roll'd
their volumes ; adders and cerastes crept
instead of hair , and their fierce temples bound .
he knowing well the miserable hags
who tend the queen of endless woe , thus spake :
" mark thou each dire erinnys . to the left
this is megaera ; on the right hand she ,
who wails , alecto ; and tisiphone
i' th' midst . " this said , in silence he remain'd
their breast they each one clawing tore ; themselves
smote with their palms , and such shrill clamour rais'd ,
that to the bard i clung , suspicion - bound .
" hasten medusa : so to adamant
him shall we change ; " all looking down exclaim'd .
" e'en when by theseus' might assail'd , we took
no ill revenge . " " turn thyself round , and keep
thy count'nance hid ; for if the gorgon dire
be shown , and thou shouldst view it , thy return
upwards would be for ever lost . " this said ,
himself my gentle master turn'd me round ,
nor trusted he my hands , but with his own
he also hid me . ye of intellect
sound and entire , mark well the lore conceal'd
under close texture of the mystic strain !
and now there came o'er the perturbed waves
loud - crashing , terrible , a sound that made
either shore tremble , as if of a wind
impetuous , from conflicting vapours sprung ,
that 'gainst some forest driving all its might ,
plucks off the branches , beats them down and hurls
afar ; then onward passing proudly sweeps
its whirlwind rage , while beasts and shepherds fly .
mine eyes he loos'd , and spake : " and now direct
thy visual nerve along that ancient foam ,
there , thickest where the smoke ascends . " as frogs
before their foe the serpent , through the wave
ply swiftly all , till at the ground each one
lies on a heap ; more than a thousand spirits
destroy'd , so saw i fleeing before one
who pass'd with unwet feet the stygian sound .
he , from his face removing the gross air ,
oft his left hand forth stretch'd , and seem'd alone
by that annoyance wearied . i perceiv'd
that he was sent from heav'n , and to my guide
turn'd me , who signal made that i should stand
quiet , and bend to him . ah me ! how full
of noble anger seem'd he ! to the gate
he came , and with his wand touch'd it , whereat
open without impediment it flew .
" outcasts of heav'n ! o abject race and scorn'd ! "
began he on the horrid grunsel standing ,
" whence doth this wild excess of insolence
lodge in you ? wherefore kick you 'gainst that will
ne'er frustrate of its end , and which so oft
hath laid on you enforcement of your pangs ?
what profits at the fays to but the horn ?
your cerberus , if ye remember , hence
bears still , peel'd of their hair , his throat and maw . "
this said , he turn'd back o'er the filthy way ,
and syllable to us spake none , but wore
the semblance of a man by other care
beset , and keenly press'd , than thought of him
who in his presence stands . then we our steps
toward that territory mov'd , secure
after the hallow'd words . we unoppos'd
there enter'd ; and my mind eager to learn
what state a fortress like to that might hold ,
i soon as enter'd throw mine eye around ,
and see on every part wide - stretching space
replete with bitter pain and torment ill .
as where rhone stagnates on the plains of arles ,
or as at pola , near quarnaro's gulf ,
that closes italy and laves her bounds ,
the place is all thick spread with sepulchres ;
so was it here , save what in horror here
excell'd : for 'midst the graves were scattered flames ,
wherewith intensely all throughout they burn'd ,
that iron for no craft there hotter needs .
their lids all hung suspended , and beneath
from them forth issu'd lamentable moans ,
such as the sad and tortur'd well might raise .
i thus : " master ! say who are these , interr'd
within these vaults , of whom distinct we hear
the dolorous sighs ? " he answer thus return'd :
" the arch - heretics are here , accompanied
by every sect their followers ; and much more ,
than thou believest , tombs are freighted : like
with like is buried ; and the monuments
are different in degrees of heat . " this said ,
he to the right hand turning , on we pass'd
betwixt the afflicted and the ramparts high .
now by a secret pathway we proceed ,
between the walls , that hem the region round ,
and the tormented souls : my master first ,
i close behind his steps . " virtue supreme ! "
i thus began ; " who through these ample orbs
in circuit lead'st me , even as thou will'st ,
speak thou , and satisfy my wish . may those ,
who lie within these sepulchres , be seen ?
already all the lids are rais'd , and none
o'er them keeps watch . " he thus in answer spake
" they shall be closed all , what - time they here
from josaphat return'd shall come , and bring
their bodies , which above they now have left .
the cemetery on this part obtain
with epicurus all his followers ,
who with the body make the spirit die .
here therefore satisfaction shall be soon
both to the question ask'd , and to the wish ,
which thou conceal'st in silence . " i replied :
" i keep not , guide belov'd ! from thee my heart
secreted , but to shun vain length of words ,
a lesson erewhile taught me by thyself . "
" o tuscan ! thou who through the city of fire
alive art passing , so discreet of speech !
here please thee stay awhile . thy utterance
declares the place of thy nativity
to be that noble land , with which perchance
i too severely dealt . " sudden that sound
forth issu'd from a vault , whereat in fear
i somewhat closer to my leader's side
approaching , he thus spake : " what dost thou ? turn .
lo , farinata , there ! who hath himself
uplifted : from his girdle upwards all
expos'd behold him . " on his face was mine
already fix'd ; his breast and forehead there
erecting , seem'd as in high scorn he held
e'en hell . between the sepulchres to him
my guide thrust me with fearless hands and prompt ,
this warning added : " see thy words be clear ! "
he , soon as there i stood at the tomb's foot ,
ey'd me a space , then in disdainful mood
address'd me : " say , what ancestors were thine ? "
i , willing to obey him , straight reveal'd
the whole , nor kept back aught : whence he , his brow
somewhat uplifting , cried : " fiercely were they
adverse to me , my party , and the blood
from whence i sprang : twice therefore i abroad
scatter'd them . " " though driv'n out , yet they each time
from all parts , " answer'd i , " return'd ; an art
which yours have shown , they are not skill'd to learn . "
then , peering forth from the unclosed jaw ,
rose from his side a shade , high as the chin ,
leaning , methought , upon its knees uprais'd .
it look'd around , as eager to explore
if there were other with me ; but perceiving
that fond imagination quench'd , with tears
thus spake : " if thou through this blind prison go'st .
led by thy lofty genius and profound ,
where is my son ? and wherefore not with thee ? "
i straight replied : " not of myself i come ,
by him , who there expects me , through this clime
conducted , whom perchance guido thy son
had in contempt . " already had his words
and mode of punishment read me his name ,
whence i so fully answer'd . he at once
exclaim'd , up starting , " how ! said'st thou he had ?
no longer lives he ? strikes not on his eye
the blessed daylight ? " then of some delay
i made ere my reply aware , down fell
supine , not after forth appear'd he more .
meanwhile the other , great of soul , near whom
i yet was station'd , chang'd not count'nance stern ,
nor mov'd the neck , nor bent his ribbed side .
" and if , " continuing the first discourse ,
" they in this art , " he cried , " small skill have shown ,
that doth torment me more e'en than this bed .
but not yet fifty times shall be relum'd
her aspect , who reigns here queen of this realm ,
ere thou shalt know the full weight of that art .
so to the pleasant world mayst thou return ,
as thou shalt tell me , why in all their laws ,
against my kin this people is so fell ? "
" the slaughter and great havoc , " i replied ,
" that colour'd arbia's flood with crimson stain --
to these impute , that in our hallow'd dome
such orisons ascend . " sighing he shook
the head , then thus resum'd : " in that affray
i stood not singly , nor without just cause
assuredly should with the rest have stirr'd ;
but singly there i stood , when by consent
of all , florence had to the ground been raz'd ,
the one who openly forbad the deed . "
" so may thy lineage find at last repose , "
i thus adjur'd him , " as thou solve this knot ,
which now involves my mind . if right i hear ,
ye seem to view beforehand , that which time
leads with him , of the present uninform'd . "
" we view , as one who hath an evil sight , "
he answer'd , " plainly , objects far remote :
so much of his large spendour yet imparts
the' almighty ruler ; but when they approach
or actually exist , our intellect
then wholly fails , nor of your human state
except what others bring us know we aught .
hence therefore mayst thou understand , that all
our knowledge in that instant shall expire ,
when on futurity the portals close . "
then conscious of my fault , and by remorse
smitten , i added thus : " now shalt thou say
to him there fallen , that his offspring still
is to the living join'd ; and bid him know ,
that if from answer silent i abstain'd ,
'twas that my thought was occupied intent
upon that error , which thy help hath solv'd . "
but now my master summoning me back
i heard , and with more eager haste besought
the spirit to inform me , who with him
partook his lot . he answer thus return'd :
" more than a thousand with me here are laid
within is frederick , second of that name ,
and the lord cardinal , and of the rest
i speak not . " he , this said , from sight withdrew .
but i my steps towards the ancient bard
reverting , ruminated on the words
betokening me such ill . onward he mov'd ,
and thus in going question'd : " whence the' amaze
that holds thy senses wrapt ? " i satisfied
the' inquiry , and the sage enjoin'd me straight :
" let thy safe memory store what thou hast heard
to thee importing harm ; and note thou this , "
with his rais'd finger bidding me take heed ,
" when thou shalt stand before her gracious beam ,
whose bright eye all surveys , she of thy life
the future tenour will to thee unfold . "
forthwith he to the left hand turn'd his feet :
we left the wall , and tow'rds the middle space
went by a path , that to a valley strikes ;
which e'en thus high exhal'd its noisome steam .
upon the utmost verge of a high bank ,
by craggy rocks environ'd round , we came ,
where woes beneath more cruel yet were stow'd :
and here to shun the horrible excess
of fetid exhalation , upward cast
from the profound abyss , behind the lid
of a great monument we stood retir'd ,
whereon this scroll i mark'd : " i have in charge
pope anastasius , whom photinus drew
from the right path . -- ere our descent behooves
we make delay , that somewhat first the sense ,
to the dire breath accustom'd , afterward
regard it not . " my master thus ; to whom
answering i spake : " some compensation find
that the time past not wholly lost . " he then :
" lo ! how my thoughts e'en to thy wishes tend !
my son ! within these rocks , " he thus began ,
" are three close circles in gradation plac'd ,
as these which now thou leav'st . each one is full
of spirits accurs'd ; but that the sight alone
hereafter may suffice thee , listen how
and for what cause in durance they abide .
" of all malicious act abhorr'd in heaven ,
the end is injury ; and all such end
either by force or fraud works other's woe
but fraud , because of man peculiar evil ,
to god is more displeasing ; and beneath
the fraudulent are therefore doom'd to' endure
severer pang . the violent occupy
all the first circle ; and because to force
three persons are obnoxious , in three rounds
hach within other sep'rate is it fram'd .
to god , his neighbour , and himself , by man
force may be offer'd ; to himself i say
and his possessions , as thou soon shalt hear
at full . death , violent death , and painful wounds
upon his neighbour he inflicts ; and wastes
by devastation , pillage , and the flames ,
his substance . slayers , and each one that smites
in malice , plund'rers , and all robbers , hence
the torment undergo of the first round
in different herds . man can do violence
to himself and his own blessings : and for this
he in the second round must aye deplore
with unavailing penitence his crime ,
whoe'er deprives himself of life and light ,
in reckless lavishment his talent wastes ,
and sorrows there where he should dwell in joy .
to god may force be offer'd , in the heart
denying and blaspheming his high power ,
and nature with her kindly law contemning .
and thence the inmost round marks with its seal
sodom and cahors , and all such as speak
contemptuously' of the godhead in their hearts .
" fraud , that in every conscience leaves a sting ,
may be by man employ'd on one , whose trust
he wins , or on another who withholds
strict confidence . seems as the latter way
broke but the bond of love which nature makes .
whence in the second circle have their nest
dissimulation , witchcraft , flatteries ,
theft , falsehood , simony , all who seduce
to lust , or set their honesty at pawn ,
with such vile scum as these . the other way
forgets both nature's general love , and that
which thereto added afterwards gives birth
to special faith . whence in the lesser circle ,
point of the universe , dread seat of dis ,
the traitor is eternally consum'd . "
i thus : " instructor , clearly thy discourse
proceeds , distinguishing the hideous chasm
and its inhabitants with skill exact .
but tell me this : they of the dull , fat pool ,
whom the rain beats , or whom the tempest drives ,
or who with tongues so fierce conflicting meet ,
wherefore within the city fire - illum'd
are not these punish'd , if god's wrath be on them ?
and if it be not , wherefore in such guise
are they condemned ? " he answer thus return'd :
" wherefore in dotage wanders thus thy mind ,
not so accustom'd ? or what other thoughts
possess it ? dwell not in thy memory
the words , wherein thy ethic page describes
three dispositions adverse to heav'n's will ,
incont'nence , malice , and mad brutishness ,
and how incontinence the least offends
god , and least guilt incurs ? if well thou note
this judgment , and remember who they are ,
without these walls to vain repentance doom'd ,
thou shalt discern why they apart are plac'd
from these fell spirits , and less wreakful pours
justice divine on them its vengeance down . "
" o sun ! who healest all imperfect sight ,
thou so content'st me , when thou solv'st my doubt ,
that ignorance not less than knowledge charms .
yet somewhat turn thee back , " i in these words
continu'd , " where thou saidst , that usury
offends celestial goodness ; and this knot
perplex'd unravel . " he thus made reply :
" philosophy , to an attentive ear ,
clearly points out , not in one part alone ,
how imitative nature takes her course
from the celestial mind and from its art :
and where her laws the stagyrite unfolds ,
not many leaves scann'd o'er , observing well
thou shalt discover , that your art on her
obsequious follows , as the learner treads
in his instructor's step , so that your art
deserves the name of second in descent
from god . these two , if thou recall to mind
creation's holy book , from the beginning
were the right source of life and excellence
to human kind . but in another path
the usurer walks ; and nature in herself
and in her follower thus he sets at nought ,
placing elsewhere his hope . but follow now
my steps on forward journey bent ; for now
the pisces play with undulating glance
along the' horizon , and the wain lies all
o'er the north - west ; and onward there a space
is our steep passage down the rocky height . "
the place where to descend the precipice
we came , was rough as alp , and on its verge
such object lay , as every eye would shun .
as is that ruin , which adice's stream
on this side trento struck , should'ring the wave ,
or loos'd by earthquake or for lack of prop ;
for from the mountain's summit , whence it mov'd
to the low level , so the headlong rock
is shiver'd , that some passage it might give
to him who from above would pass ; e'en such
into the chasm was that descent : and there
at point of the disparted ridge lay stretch'd
the infamy of crete , detested brood
of the feign'd heifer : and at sight of us
it gnaw'd itself , as one with rage distract .
to him my guide exclaim'd : " perchance thou deem'st
the king of athens here , who , in the world
above , thy death contriv'd . monster ! avaunt !
he comes not tutor'd by thy sister's art ,
but to behold your torments is he come . "
like to a bull , that with impetuous spring
darts , at the moment when the fatal blow
hath struck him , but unable to proceed
plunges on either side ; so saw i plunge
the minotaur ; whereat the sage exclaim'd :
" run to the passage ! while he storms , 't is well
that thou descend . " thus down our road we took
through those dilapidated crags , that oft
mov'd underneath my feet , to weight like theirs
unus'd . i pond'ring went , and thus he spake :
" perhaps thy thoughts are of this ruin'd steep ,
guarded by the brute violence , which i
have vanquish'd now . know then , that when i erst
hither descended to the nether hell ,
this rock was not yet fallen . but past doubt
( if well i mark ) not long ere he arrived ,
who carried off from dis the mighty spoil
of the highest circle , then through all its bounds
such trembling seiz'd the deep concave and foul ,
i thought the universe was thrill'd with love ,
whereby , there are who deem , the world hath oft
been into chaos turn'd : and in that point ,
here , and elsewhere , that old rock toppled down .
but fix thine eyes beneath : the river of blood
approaches , in the which all those are steep'd ,
who have by violence injur'd . " o blind lust !
o foolish wrath ! who so dost goad us on
in the brief life , and in the eternal then
thus miserably o'erwhelm us . i beheld
an ample foss , that in a bow was bent ,
as circling all the plain ; for so my guide
had told . between it and the rampart's base
on trail ran centaurs , with keen arrows arm'd ,
as to the chase they on the earth were wont .
at seeing us descend they each one stood ;
and issuing from the troop , three sped with bows
and missile weapons chosen first ; of whom
one cried from far : " say to what pain ye come
condemn'd , who down this steep have journied ? speak
from whence ye stand , or else the bow i draw . "
to whom my guide : " our answer shall be made
to chiron , there , when nearer him we come .
ill was thy mind , thus ever quick and rash . "
then me he touch'd , and spake : " nessus is this ,
who for the fair deianira died ,
and wrought himself revenge for his own fate .
he in the midst , that on his breast looks down ,
is the great chiron who achilles nurs'd ;
that other pholus , prone to wrath . " around
the foss these go by thousands , aiming shafts
at whatsoever spirit dares emerge
from out the blood , more than his guilt allows .
we to those beasts , that rapid strode along ,
drew near , when chiron took an arrow forth ,
and with the notch push'd back his shaggy beard
to the cheek - bone , then his great mouth to view
exposing , to his fellows thus exclaim'd :
" are ye aware , that he who comes behind
moves what he touches ? the feet of the dead
are not so wont . " my trusty guide , who now
stood near his breast , where the two natures join ,
thus made reply : " he is indeed alive ,
and solitary so must needs by me
be shown the gloomy vale , thereto induc'd
by strict necessity , not by delight .
she left her joyful harpings in the sky ,
who this new office to my care consign'd .
he is no robber , no dark spirit i .
but by that virtue , which empowers my step
to treat so wild a path , grant us , i pray ,
one of thy band , whom we may trust secure ,
who to the ford may lead us , and convey
across , him mounted on his back ; for he
is not a spirit that may walk the air . "
then on his right breast turning , chiron thus
to nessus spake : " return , and be their guide .
and if ye chance to cross another troop ,
command them keep aloof . " onward we mov'd ,
the faithful escort by our side , along
the border of the crimson - seething flood ,
whence from those steep'd within loud shrieks arose .
some there i mark'd , as high as to their brow
immers'd , of whom the mighty centaur thus :
" these are the souls of tyrants , who were given
to blood and rapine . here they wail aloud
their merciless wrongs . here alexander dwells ,
and dionysius fell , who many a year
of woe wrought for fair sicily . that brow
whereon the hair so jetty clust'ring hangs ,
is azzolino ; that with flaxen locks
obizzo' of este , in the world destroy'd
by his foul step - son . " to the bard rever'd
i turned me round , and thus he spake ; " let him
be to thee now first leader , me but next
to him in rank . " then farther on a space
the centaur paus'd , near some , who at the throat
were extant from the wave ; and showing us
a spirit by itself apart retir'd ,
exclaim'd : " he in god's bosom smote the heart ,
which yet is honour'd on the bank of thames . "
a race i next espied , who held the head ,
and even all the bust above the stream .
'midst these i many a face remember'd well .
thus shallow more and more the blood became ,
so that at last it but imbru'd the feet ;
and there our passage lay athwart the foss .
" as ever on this side the boiling wave
thou seest diminishing , " the centaur said ,
" so on the other , be thou well assur'd ,
it lower still and lower sinks its bed ,
till in that part it reuniting join ,
where 't is the lot of tyranny to mourn .
there heav'n's stern justice lays chastising hand
on attila , who was the scourge of earth ,
on sextus , and on pyrrhus , and extracts
tears ever by the seething flood unlock'd
from the rinieri , of corneto this ,
pazzo the other nam'd , who fill'd the ways
with violence and war . " this said , he turn'd ,
and quitting us , alone repass'd the ford .
ere nessus yet had reach'd the other bank ,
we enter'd on a forest , where no track
of steps had worn a way . not verdant there
the foliage , but of dusky hue ; not light
the boughs and tapering , but with knares deform'd
and matted thick : fruits there were none , but thorns
instead , with venom fill'd . less sharp than these ,
less intricate the brakes , wherein abide
those animals , that hate the cultur'd fields ,
betwixt corneto and cecina's stream .
here the brute harpies make their nest , the same
who from the strophades the trojan band
drove with dire boding of their future woe .
broad are their pennons , of the human form
their neck and count'nance , arm'd with talons keen
the feet , and the huge belly fledge with wings
these sit and wail on the drear mystic wood .
the kind instructor in these words began :
" ere farther thou proceed , know thou art now
i' th' second round , and shalt be , till thou come
upon the horrid sand : look therefore well
around thee , and such things thou shalt behold ,
as would my speech discredit . " on all sides
i heard sad plainings breathe , and none could see
from whom they might have issu'd . in amaze
fast bound i stood . he , as it seem'd , believ'd ,
that i had thought so many voices came
from some amid those thickets close conceal'd ,
and thus his speech resum'd : " if thou lop off
a single twig from one of those ill plants ,
the thought thou hast conceiv'd shall vanish quite . "
thereat a little stretching forth my hand ,
from a great wilding gather'd i a branch ,
and straight the trunk exclaim'd : " why pluck'st thou me ? "
then as the dark blood trickled down its side ,
these words it added : " wherefore tear'st me thus ?
is there no touch of mercy in thy breast ?
men once were we , that now are rooted here .
thy hand might well have spar'd us , had we been
the souls of serpents . " as a brand yet green ,
that burning at one end from the' other sends
a groaning sound , and hisses with the wind
that forces out its way , so burst at once ,
forth from the broken splinter words and blood .
i , letting fall the bough , remain'd as one
assail'd by terror , and the sage replied :
" if he , o injur'd spirit ! could have believ'd
what he hath seen but in my verse describ'd ,
he never against thee had stretch'd his hand .
but i , because the thing surpass'd belief ,
prompted him to this deed , which even now
myself i rue . but tell me , who thou wast ;
that , for this wrong to do thee some amends ,
in the upper world ( for thither to return
is granted him ) thy fame he may revive . "
" that pleasant word of thine , " the trunk replied
" hath so inveigled me , that i from speech
cannot refrain , wherein if i indulge
a little longer , in the snare detain'd ,
count it not grievous . i it was , who held
both keys to frederick's heart , and turn'd the wards ,
opening and shutting , with a skill so sweet ,
that besides me , into his inmost breast
scarce any other could admittance find .
the faith i bore to my high charge was such ,
it cost me the life - blood that warm'd my veins .
the harlot , who ne'er turn'd her gloating eyes
from caesar's household , common vice and pest
of courts , 'gainst me inflam'd the minds of all ;
and to augustus they so spread the flame ,
that my glad honours chang'd to bitter woes .
my soul , disdainful and disgusted , sought
refuge in death from scorn , and i became ,
just as i was , unjust toward myself .
by the new roots , which fix this stem , i swear ,
that never faith i broke to my liege lord ,
who merited such honour ; and of you ,
if any to the world indeed return ,
clear he from wrong my memory , that lies
yet prostrate under envy's cruel blow . "
first somewhat pausing , till the mournful words
were ended , then to me the bard began :
" lose not the time ; but speak and of him ask ,
if more thou wish to learn . " whence i replied :
" question thou him again of whatsoe'er
will , as thou think'st , content me ; for no power
have i to ask , such pity' is at my heart . "
he thus resum'd ; " so may he do for thee
freely what thou entreatest , as thou yet
be pleas'd , imprison'd spirit ! to declare ,
how in these gnarled joints the soul is tied ;
and whether any ever from such frame
be loosen'd , if thou canst , that also tell . "
thereat the trunk breath'd hard , and the wind soon
chang'd into sounds articulate like these ;
" briefly ye shall be answer'd . when departs
the fierce soul from the body , by itself
thence torn asunder , to the seventh gulf
by minos doom'd , into the wood it falls ,
no place assign'd , but wheresoever chance
hurls it , there sprouting , as a grain of spelt ,
it rises to a sapling , growing thence
a savage plant . the harpies , on its leaves
then feeding , cause both pain and for the pain
a vent to grief . we , as the rest , shall come
for our own spoils , yet not so that with them
we may again be clad ; for what a man
takes from himself it is not just he have .
here we perforce shall drag them ; and throughout
the dismal glade our bodies shall be hung ,
each on the wild thorn of his wretched shade . "
attentive yet to listen to the trunk
we stood , expecting farther speech , when us
a noise surpris'd , as when a man perceives
the wild boar and the hunt approach his place
of station'd watch , who of the beasts and boughs
loud rustling round him hears . and lo ! there came
two naked , torn with briers , in headlong flight ,
that they before them broke each fan o' th' wood .
" haste now , " the foremost cried , " now haste thee death ! "
the' other , as seem'd , impatient of delay
exclaiming , " lano ! not so bent for speed
thy sinews , in the lists of toppo's field . "
and then , for that perchance no longer breath
suffic'd him , of himself and of a bush
one group he made . behind them was the wood
full of black female mastiffs , gaunt and fleet ,
as greyhounds that have newly slipp'd the leash .
on him , who squatted down , they stuck their fangs ,
and having rent him piecemeal bore away
the tortur'd limbs . my guide then seiz'd my hand ,
and led me to the thicket , which in vain
mourn'd through its bleeding wounds : " o giacomo
of sant' andrea ! what avails it thee , "
it cried , " that of me thou hast made thy screen ?
for thy ill life what blame on me recoils ? "
when o'er it he had paus'd , my master spake :
" say who wast thou , that at so many points
breath'st out with blood thy lamentable speech ? "
he answer'd : " oh , ye spirits : arriv'd in time
to spy the shameful havoc , that from me
my leaves hath sever'd thus , gather them up ,
and at the foot of their sad parent - tree
carefully lay them . in that city' i dwelt ,
who for the baptist her first patron chang'd ,
whence he for this shall cease not with his art
to work her woe : and if there still remain'd not
on arno's passage some faint glimpse of him ,
those citizens , who rear'd once more her walls
upon the ashes left by attila ,
had labour'd without profit of their toil .
i slung the fatal noose from my own roof . "
soon as the charity of native land
wrought in my bosom , i the scatter'd leaves
collected , and to him restor'd , who now
was hoarse with utt'rance . to the limit thence
we came , which from the third the second round
divides , and where of justice is display'd
contrivance horrible . things then first seen
clearlier to manifest , i tell how next
a plain we reach'd , that from its sterile bed
each plant repell'd . the mournful wood waves round
its garland on all sides , as round the wood
spreads the sad foss . there , on the very edge ,
our steps we stay'd . it was an area wide
of arid sand and thick , resembling most
the soil that erst by cato's foot was trod .
vengeance of heav'n ! oh ! how shouldst thou be fear'd
by all , who read what here my eyes beheld !
of naked spirits many a flock i saw ,
all weeping piteously , to different laws
subjected : for on the' earth some lay supine ,
some crouching close were seated , others pac'd
incessantly around ; the latter tribe ,
more numerous , those fewer who beneath
the torment lay , but louder in their grief .
o'er all the sand fell slowly wafting down
dilated flakes of fire , as flakes of snow
on alpine summit , when the wind is hush'd .
as in the torrid indian clime , the son
of ammon saw upon his warrior band
descending , solid flames , that to the ground
came down : whence he bethought him with his troop
to trample on the soil ; for easier thus
the vapour was extinguish'd , while alone ;
so fell the eternal fiery flood , wherewith
the marble glow'd underneath , as under stove
the viands , doubly to augment the pain .
unceasing was the play of wretched hands ,
now this , now that way glancing , to shake off
the heat , still falling fresh . i thus began :
" instructor ! thou who all things overcom'st ,
except the hardy demons , that rush'd forth
to stop our entrance at the gate , say who
is yon huge spirit , that , as seems , heeds not
the burning , but lies writhen in proud scorn ,
as by the sultry tempest immatur'd ? "
straight he himself , who was aware i ask'd
my guide of him , exclaim'd : " such as i was
when living , dead such now i am . if jove
weary his workman out , from whom in ire
he snatch'd the lightnings , that at my last day
transfix'd me , if the rest be weary out
at their black smithy labouring by turns
in mongibello , while he cries aloud ;
" help , help , good mulciber ! " as erst he cried
in the phlegraean warfare , and the bolts
launch he full aim'd at me with all his might ,
he never should enjoy a sweet revenge . "
then thus my guide , in accent higher rais'd
than i before had heard him : " capaneus !
thou art more punish'd , in that this thy pride
lives yet unquench'd : no torrent , save thy rage ,
were to thy fury pain proportion'd full . "
next turning round to me with milder lip
he spake : " this of the seven kings was one ,
who girt the theban walls with siege , and held ,
as still he seems to hold , god in disdain ,
and sets his high omnipotence at nought .
but , as i told him , his despiteful mood
is ornament well suits the breast that wears it .
follow me now ; and look thou set not yet
thy foot in the hot sand , but to the wood
keep ever close . " silently on we pass'd
to where there gushes from the forest's bound
a little brook , whose crimson'd wave yet lifts
my hair with horror . as the rill , that runs
from bulicame , to be portion'd out
among the sinful women ; so ran this
down through the sand , its bottom and each bank
stone - built , and either margin at its side ,
whereon i straight perceiv'd our passage lay .
" of all that i have shown thee , since that gate
we enter'd first , whose threshold is to none
denied , nought else so worthy of regard ,
as is this river , has thine eye discern'd ,
o'er which the flaming volley all is quench'd . "
so spake my guide ; and i him thence besought ,
that having giv'n me appetite to know ,
the food he too would give , that hunger crav'd .
" in midst of ocean , " forthwith he began ,
" a desolate country lies , which crete is nam'd ,
under whose monarch in old times the world
liv'd pure and chaste . a mountain rises there ,
call'd ida , joyous once with leaves and streams ,
deserted now like a forbidden thing .
it was the spot which rhea , saturn's spouse ,
chose for the secret cradle of her son ;
and better to conceal him , drown'd in shouts
his infant cries . within the mount , upright
an ancient form there stands and huge , that turns
his shoulders towards damiata , and at rome
as in his mirror looks . of finest gold
his head is shap'd , pure silver are the breast
and arms ; thence to the middle is of brass .
and downward all beneath well - temper'd steel ,
save the right foot of potter's clay , on which
than on the other more erect he stands ,
each part except the gold , is rent throughout ;
and from the fissure tears distil , which join'd
penetrate to that cave . they in their course
thus far precipitated down the rock
form acheron , and styx , and phlegethon ;
then by this straiten'd channel passing hence
beneath , e'en to the lowest depth of all ,
form there cocytus , of whose lake ( thyself
shall see it ) i here give thee no account . "
then i to him : " if from our world this sluice
be thus deriv'd ; wherefore to us but now
appears it at this edge ? " he straight replied :
" the place , thou know'st , is round ; and though great part
thou have already pass'd , still to the left
descending to the nethermost , not yet
hast thou the circuit made of the whole orb .
wherefore if aught of new to us appear ,
it needs not bring up wonder in thy looks . "
then i again inquir'd : " where flow the streams
of phlegethon and lethe ? for of one
thou tell'st not , and the other of that shower ,
thou say'st , is form'd . " he answer thus return'd :
" doubtless thy questions all well pleas'd i hear .
yet the red seething wave might have resolv'd
one thou proposest . lethe thou shalt see ,
but not within this hollow , in the place ,
whither to lave themselves the spirits go ,
whose blame hath been by penitence remov'd . "
he added : " time is now we quit the wood .
look thou my steps pursue : the margins give
safe passage , unimpeded by the flames ;
for over them all vapour is extinct . "
one of the solid margins bears us now
envelop'd in the mist , that from the stream
arising , hovers o'er , and saves from fire
both piers and water . as the flemings rear
their mound , 'twixt ghent and bruges , to chase back
the ocean , fearing his tumultuous tide
that drives toward them , or the paduans theirs
along the brenta , to defend their towns
and castles , ere the genial warmth be felt
on chiarentana's top ; such were the mounds ,
so fram'd , though not in height or bulk to these
made equal , by the master , whosoe'er
he was , that rais'd them here . we from the wood
were not so far remov'd , that turning round
i might not have discern'd it , when we met
a troop of spirits , who came beside the pier .
they each one ey'd us , as at eventide
one eyes another under a new moon ,
and toward us sharpen'd their sight as keen ,
as an old tailor at his needle's eye .
thus narrowly explor'd by all the tribe ,
i was agniz'd of one , who by the skirt
caught me , and cried , " what wonder have we here ! "
and i , when he to me outstretch'd his arm ,
intently fix'd my ken on his parch'd looks ,
that although smirch'd with fire , they hinder'd not
but i remember'd him ; and towards his face
my hand inclining , answer'd : " sir ! brunetto !
" and art thou here ? " he thus to me : " my son !
oh let it not displease thee , if brunetto
latini but a little space with thee
turn back , and leave his fellows to proceed . "
i thus to him replied : " much as i can ,
i thereto pray thee ; and if thou be willing ,
that i here seat me with thee , i consent ;
his leave , with whom i journey , first obtain'd . "
" o son ! " said he , " whoever of this throng
one instant stops , lies then a hundred years ,
no fan to ventilate him , when the fire
smites sorest . pass thou therefore on . i close
will at thy garments walk , and then rejoin
my troop , who go mourning their endless doom . "
i dar'd not from the path descend to tread
on equal ground with him , but held my head
bent down , as one who walks in reverent guise .
" what chance or destiny , " thus he began ,
" ere the last day conducts thee here below ?
and who is this , that shows to thee the way ? "
" there up aloft , " i answer'd , " in the life
serene , i wander'd in a valley lost ,
before mine age had to its fullness reach'd .
but yester - morn i left it : then once more
into that vale returning , him i met ;
and by this path homeward he leads me back . "
" if thou , " he answer'd , " follow but thy star ,
thou canst not miss at last a glorious haven :
unless in fairer days my judgment err'd .
and if my fate so early had not chanc'd ,
seeing the heav'ns thus bounteous to thee , i
had gladly giv'n thee comfort in thy work .
but that ungrateful and malignant race ,
who in old times came down from fesole ,
ay and still smack of their rough mountain - flint ,
will for thy good deeds shew thee enmity .
nor wonder ; for amongst ill - savour'd crabs
it suits not the sweet fig - tree lay her fruit .
old fame reports them in the world for blind ,
covetous , envious , proud . look to it well :
take heed thou cleanse thee of their ways . for thee
thy fortune hath such honour in reserve ,
that thou by either party shalt be crav'd
with hunger keen : but be the fresh herb far
from the goat's tooth . the herd of fesole
may of themselves make litter , not touch the plant ,
if any such yet spring on their rank bed ,
in which the holy seed revives , transmitted
from those true romans , who still there remain'd ,
when it was made the nest of so much ill . "
" were all my wish fulfill'd , " i straight replied ,
" thou from the confines of man's nature yet
hadst not been driven forth ; for in my mind
is fix'd , and now strikes full upon my heart
the dear , benign , paternal image , such
as thine was , when so lately thou didst teach me
the way for man to win eternity ;
and how i priz'd the lesson , it behooves ,
that , long as life endures , my tongue should speak ,
what of my fate thou tell'st , that write i down :
and with another text to comment on
for her i keep it , the celestial dame ,
who will know all , if i to her arrive .
this only would i have thee clearly note :
that so my conscience have no plea against me ;
do fortune as she list , i stand prepar'd .
not new or strange such earnest to mine ear .
speed fortune then her wheel , as likes her best ,
the clown his mattock ; all things have their course . "
thereat my sapient guide upon his right
turn'd himself back , then look'd at me and spake :
" he listens to good purpose who takes note . "
i not the less still on my way proceed ,
discoursing with brunetto , and inquire
who are most known and chief among his tribe .
" to know of some is well ; " thus he replied ,
" but of the rest silence may best beseem .
time would not serve us for report so long .
in brief i tell thee , that all these were clerks ,
men of great learning and no less renown ,
by one same sin polluted in the world .
with them is priscian , and accorso's son
francesco herds among that wretched throng :
and , if the wish of so impure a blotch
possess'd thee , him thou also might'st have seen ,
who by the servants' servant was transferr'd
from arno's seat to bacchiglione , where
his ill - strain'd nerves he left . i more would add ,
but must from farther speech and onward way
alike desist , for yonder i behold
a mist new - risen on the sandy plain .
a company , with whom i may not sort ,
approaches . i commend my treasure to thee ,
wherein i yet survive ; my sole request . "
this said he turn'd , and seem'd as one of those ,
who o'er verona's champain try their speed
for the green mantle , and of them he seem'd ,
not he who loses but who gains the prize .
now came i where the water's din was heard ,
as down it fell into the other round ,
resounding like the hum of swarming bees :
when forth together issu'd from a troop ,
that pass'd beneath the fierce tormenting storm ,
three spirits , running swift . they towards us came ,
and each one cried aloud , " oh do thou stay !
whom by the fashion of thy garb we deem
to be some inmate of our evil land . "
ah me ! what wounds i mark'd upon their limbs ,
recent and old , inflicted by the flames !
e'en the remembrance of them grieves me yet .
attentive to their cry my teacher paus'd ,
and turn'd to me his visage , and then spake ;
" wait now ! our courtesy these merit well :
and were 't not for the nature of the place ,
whence glide the fiery darts , i should have said ,
that haste had better suited thee than them . "
they , when we stopp'd , resum'd their ancient wail ,
and soon as they had reach'd us , all the three
whirl'd round together in one restless wheel .
as naked champions , smear'd with slippery oil ,
are wont intent to watch their place of hold
and vantage , ere in closer strife they meet ;
thus each one , as he wheel'd , his countenance
at me directed , so that opposite
the neck mov'd ever to the twinkling feet .
" if misery of this drear wilderness , "
thus one began , " added to our sad cheer
and destitute , do call forth scorn on us
and our entreaties , let our great renown
incline thee to inform us who thou art ,
that dost imprint with living feet unharm'd
the soil of hell . he , in whose track thou see'st
my steps pursuing , naked though he be
and reft of all , was of more high estate
than thou believest ; grandchild of the chaste
gualdrada , him they guidoguerra call'd ,
who in his lifetime many a noble act
achiev'd , both by his wisdom and his sword .
the other , next to me that beats the sand ,
is aldobrandi , name deserving well ,
in the' upper world , of honour ; and myself
who in this torment do partake with them ,
am rusticucci , whom , past doubt , my wife
of savage temper , more than aught beside
hath to this evil brought . " if from the fire
i had been shelter'd , down amidst them straight
i then had cast me , nor my guide , i deem ,
would have restrain'd my going ; but that fear
of the dire burning vanquish'd the desire ,
which made me eager of their wish'd embrace .
i then began : " not scorn , but grief much more ,
such as long time alone can cure , your doom
fix'd deep within me , soon as this my lord
spake words , whose tenour taught me to expect
that such a race , as ye are , was at hand .
i am a countryman of yours , who still
affectionate have utter'd , and have heard
your deeds and names renown'd . leaving the gall
for the sweet fruit i go , that a sure guide
hath promis'd to me . but behooves , that far
as to the centre first i downward tend . "
" so may long space thy spirit guide thy limbs , "
he answer straight return'd ; " and so thy fame
shine bright , when thou art gone ; as thou shalt tell ,
if courtesy and valour , as they wont ,
dwell in our city , or have vanish'd clean ?
for one amidst us late condemn'd to wail ,
borsiere , yonder walking with his peers ,
grieves us no little by the news he brings . "
" an upstart multitude and sudden gains ,
pride and excess , o florence ! have in thee
engender'd , so that now in tears thou mourn'st ! "
thus cried i with my face uprais'd , and they
all three , who for an answer took my words ,
look'd at each other , as men look when truth
comes to their ear . " if thou at other times , "
they all at once rejoin'd , " so easily
satisfy those , who question , happy thou ,
gifted with words , so apt to speak thy thought !
wherefore if thou escape this darksome clime ,
returning to behold the radiant stars ,
when thou with pleasure shalt retrace the past ,
see that of us thou speak among mankind . "
this said , they broke the circle , and so swift
fled , that as pinions seem'd their nimble feet .
not in so short a time might one have said
" amen , " as they had vanish'd . straight my guide
pursu'd his track . i follow'd ; and small space
had we pass'd onward , when the water's sound
was now so near at hand , that we had scarce
heard one another's speech for the loud din .
e'en as the river , that holds on its course
unmingled , from the mount of vesulo ,
on the left side of apennine , toward
the east , which acquacheta higher up
they call , ere it descend into the vale ,
at forli by that name no longer known ,
rebellows o'er saint benedict , roll'd on
from the' alpine summit down a precipice ,
where space enough to lodge a thousand spreads ;
thus downward from a craggy steep we found ,
that this dark wave resounded , roaring loud ,
so that the ear its clamour soon had stunn'd .
i had a cord that brac'd my girdle round ,
wherewith i erst had thought fast bound to take
the painted leopard . this when i had all
unloosen'd from me ( so my master bade )
i gather'd up , and stretch'd it forth to him .
then to the right he turn'd , and from the brink
standing few paces distant , cast it down
into the deep abyss . " and somewhat strange , "
thus to myself i spake , " signal so strange
betokens , which my guide with earnest eye
thus follows . " ah ! what caution must men use
with those who look not at the deed alone ,
but spy into the thoughts with subtle skill !
" quickly shall come , " he said , " what i expect ,
thine eye discover quickly , that whereof
thy thought is dreaming . " ever to that truth ,
which but the semblance of a falsehood wears ,
a man , if possible , should bar his lip ;
since , although blameless , he incurs reproach .
but silence here were vain ; and by these notes
which now i sing , reader ! i swear to thee ,
so may they favour find to latest times !
that through the gross and murky air i spied
a shape come swimming up , that might have quell'd
the stoutest heart with wonder , in such guise
as one returns , who hath been down to loose
an anchor grappled fast against some rock ,
or to aught else that in the salt wave lies ,
who upward springing close draws in his feet .
" lo ! the fell monster with the deadly sting !
who passes mountains , breaks through fenced walls
and firm embattled spears , and with his filth
taints all the world ! " thus me my guide address'd ,
and beckon'd him , that he should come to shore ,
near to the stony causeway's utmost edge .
forthwith that image vile of fraud appear'd ,
his head and upper part expos'd on land ,
but laid not on the shore his bestial train .
his face the semblance of a just man's wore ,
so kind and gracious was its outward cheer ;
the rest was serpent all : two shaggy claws
reach'd to the armpits , and the back and breast ,
and either side , were painted o'er with nodes
and orbits . colours variegated more
nor turks nor tartars e'er on cloth of state
with interchangeable embroidery wove ,
nor spread arachne o'er her curious loom .
as ofttimes a light skiff , moor'd to the shore ,
stands part in water , part upon the land ;
or , as where dwells the greedy german boor ,
the beaver settles watching for his prey ;
so on the rim , that fenc'd the sand with rock ,
sat perch'd the fiend of evil . in the void
glancing , his tail upturn'd its venomous fork ,
with sting like scorpion's arm'd . then thus my guide :
" now need our way must turn few steps apart ,
far as to that ill beast , who couches there . "
thereat toward the right our downward course
we shap'd , and , better to escape the flame
and burning marle , ten paces on the verge
proceeded . soon as we to him arrive ,
a little further on mine eye beholds
a tribe of spirits , seated on the sand
near the wide chasm . forthwith my master spake :
" that to the full thy knowledge may extend
of all this round contains , go now , and mark
the mien these wear : but hold not long discourse .
till thou returnest , i with him meantime
will parley , that to us he may vouchsafe
the aid of his strong shoulders . " thus alone
yet forward on the' extremity i pac'd
of that seventh circle , where the mournful tribe
were seated . at the eyes forth gush'd their pangs .
against the vapours and the torrid soil
alternately their shifting hands they plied .
thus use the dogs in summer still to ply
their jaws and feet by turns , when bitten sore
by gnats , or flies , or gadflies swarming round .
noting the visages of some , who lay
beneath the pelting of that dolorous fire ,
one of them all i knew not ; but perceiv'd ,
that pendent from his neck each bore a pouch
with colours and with emblems various mark'd ,
on which it seem'd as if their eye did feed .
and when amongst them looking round i came ,
a yellow purse i saw with azure wrought ,
that wore a lion's countenance and port .
then still my sight pursuing its career ,
another i beheld , than blood more red .
a goose display of whiter wing than curd .
and one , who bore a fat and azure swine
pictur'd on his white scrip , addressed me thus :
" what dost thou in this deep ? go now and know ,
since yet thou livest , that my neighbour here
vitaliano on my left shall sit .
a paduan with these florentines am i .
ofttimes they thunder in mine ears , exclaiming
'o haste that noble knight ! he who the pouch
with the three beaks will bring ! ' " this said , he writh'd
the mouth , and loll'd the tongue out , like an ox
that licks his nostrils . i , lest longer stay
he ill might brook , who bade me stay not long ,
backward my steps from those sad spirits turn'd .
my guide already seated on the haunch
of the fierce animal i found ; and thus
he me encourag'd . " be thou stout ; be bold .
down such a steep flight must we now descend !
mount thou before : for that no power the tail
may have to harm thee , i will be i' th' midst . "
as one , who hath an ague fit so near ,
his nails already are turn'd blue , and he
quivers all o'er , if he but eye the shade ;
such was my cheer at hearing of his words .
but shame soon interpos'd her threat , who makes
the servant bold in presence of his lord .
i settled me upon those shoulders huge ,
and would have said , but that the words to aid
my purpose came not , " look thou clasp me firm ! "
but he whose succour then not first i prov'd ,
soon as i mounted , in his arms aloft ,
embracing , held me up , and thus he spake :
" geryon ! now move thee ! be thy wheeling gyres
of ample circuit , easy thy descent .
think on th' unusual burden thou sustain'st . "
as a small vessel , back'ning out from land ,
her station quits ; so thence the monster loos'd ,
and when he felt himself at large , turn'd round
there where the breast had been , his forked tail .
thus , like an eel , outstretch'd at length he steer'd ,
gath'ring the air up with retractile claws .
not greater was the dread when phaeton
the reins let drop at random , whence high heaven ,
whereof signs yet appear , was wrapt in flames ;
nor when ill - fated icarus perceiv'd ,
by liquefaction of the scalded wax ,
the trusted pennons loosen'd from his loins ,
his sire exclaiming loud , " ill way thou keep'st ! "
than was my dread , when round me on each part
the air i view'd , and other object none
save the fell beast . he slowly sailing , wheels
his downward motion , unobserv'd of me ,
but that the wind , arising to my face ,
breathes on me from below . now on our right
i heard the cataract beneath us leap
with hideous crash ; whence bending down to' explore ,
new terror i conceiv'd at the steep plunge :
for flames i saw , and wailings smote mine ear :
so that all trembling close i crouch'd my limbs ,
and then distinguish'd , unperceiv'd before ,
by the dread torments that on every side
drew nearer , how our downward course we wound .
as falcon , that hath long been on the wing ,
but lure nor bird hath seen , while in despair
the falconer cries , " ah me ! thou stoop'st to earth ! "
wearied descends , and swiftly down the sky
in many an orbit wheels , then lighting sits
at distance from his lord in angry mood ;
so geryon lighting places us on foot
low down at base of the deep - furrow'd rock ,
and , of his burden there discharg'd , forthwith
sprang forward , like an arrow from the string .
there is a place within the depths of hell
call'd malebolge , all of rock dark - stain'd
with hue ferruginous , e'en as the steep
that round it circling winds . right in the midst
of that abominable region , yawns
a spacious gulf profound , whereof the frame
due time shall tell . the circle , that remains ,
throughout its round , between the gulf and base
of the high craggy banks , successive forms
ten trenches , in its hollow bottom sunk .
as where to guard the walls , full many a foss
begirds some stately castle , sure defence
affording to the space within , so here
were model'd these ; and as like fortresses
e'en from their threshold to the brink without ,
are flank'd with bridges ; from the rock's low base
thus flinty paths advanc'd , that 'cross the moles
and dikes , struck onward far as to the gulf ,
that in one bound collected cuts them off .
such was the place , wherein we found ourselves
from geryon's back dislodg'd . the bard to left
held on his way , and i behind him mov'd .
on our right hand new misery i saw ,
new pains , new executioners of wrath ,
that swarming peopled the first chasm . below
were naked sinners . hitherward they came ,
meeting our faces from the middle point ,
with us beyond but with a larger stride .
e'en thus the romans , when the year returns
of jubilee , with better speed to rid
the thronging multitudes , their means devise
for such as pass the bridge ; that on one side
all front toward the castle , and approach
saint peter's fane , on th' other towards the mount .
each divers way along the grisly rock ,
horn'd demons i beheld , with lashes huge ,
that on their back unmercifully smote .
ah ! how they made them bound at the first stripe !
none for the second waited nor the third .
meantime as on i pass'd , one met my sight
whom soon as view'd ; " of him , " cried i , " not yet
mine eye hath had his fill . " with fixed gaze
i therefore scann'd him . straight the teacher kind
paus'd with me , and consented i should walk
backward a space , and the tormented spirit ,
who thought to hide him , bent his visage down .
but it avail'd him nought ; for i exclaim'd :
" thou who dost cast thy eye upon the ground ,
unless thy features do belie thee much ,
venedico art thou . but what brings thee
into this bitter seas'ning ? " he replied :
" unwillingly i answer to thy words .
but thy clear speech , that to my mind recalls
the world i once inhabited , constrains me .
know then 'twas i who led fair ghisola
to do the marquis' will , however fame
the shameful tale have bruited . nor alone
bologna hither sendeth me to mourn
rather with us the place is so o'erthrong'd
that not so many tongues this day are taught ,
betwixt the reno and savena's stream ,
to answer sipa in their country's phrase .
and if of that securer proof thou need ,
remember but our craving thirst for gold . "
him speaking thus , a demon with his thong
struck , and exclaim'd , " away ! corrupter ! here
women are none for sale . " forthwith i join'd
my escort , and few paces thence we came
to where a rock forth issued from the bank .
that easily ascended , to the right
upon its splinter turning , we depart
from those eternal barriers . when arriv'd ,
where underneath the gaping arch lets pass
the scourged souls : " pause here , " the teacher said ,
" and let these others miserable , now
strike on thy ken , faces not yet beheld ,
for that together they with us have walk'd . "
from the old bridge we ey'd the pack , who came
from th' other side towards us , like the rest ,
excoriate from the lash . my gentle guide ,
by me unquestion'd , thus his speech resum'd :
" behold that lofty shade , who this way tends ,
and seems too woe - begone to drop a tear .
how yet the regal aspect he retains !
jason is he , whose skill and prowess won
the ram from colchos . to the lemnian isle
his passage thither led him , when those bold
and pitiless women had slain all their males .
there he with tokens and fair witching words
hypsipyle beguil'd , a virgin young ,
who first had all the rest herself beguil'd .
impregnated he left her there forlorn .
such is the guilt condemns him to this pain .
here too medea's inj'ries are avenged .
all bear him company , who like deceit
to his have practis'd . and thus much to know
of the first vale suffice thee , and of those
whom its keen torments urge . " now had we come
where , crossing the next pier , the straighten'd path
bestrides its shoulders to another arch .
hence in the second chasm we heard the ghosts ,
who jibber in low melancholy sounds ,
with wide - stretch'd nostrils snort , and on themselves
smite with their palms . upon the banks a scurf
from the foul steam condens'd , encrusting hung ,
that held sharp combat with the sight and smell .
so hollow is the depth , that from no part ,
save on the summit of the rocky span ,
could i distinguish aught . thus far we came ;
and thence i saw , within the foss below ,
a crowd immers'd in ordure , that appear'd
draff of the human body . there beneath
searching with eye inquisitive , i mark'd
one with his head so grim'd , 't were hard to deem ,
if he were clerk or layman . loud he cried :
" why greedily thus bendest more on me ,
than on these other filthy ones , thy ken ? "
" because if true my mem'ry , " i replied ,
" i heretofore have seen thee with dry locks ,
and thou alessio art of lucca sprung .
therefore than all the rest i scan thee more . "
then beating on his brain these words he spake :
" me thus low down my flatteries have sunk ,
wherewith i ne'er enough could glut my tongue . "
my leader thus : " a little further stretch
thy face , that thou the visage well mayst note
of that besotted , sluttish courtezan ,
who there doth rend her with defiled nails ,
now crouching down , now risen on her feet .
" thais is this , the harlot , whose false lip
answer'd her doting paramour that ask'd ,
'thankest me much ! ' -- 'say rather wondrously , '
and seeing this here satiate be our view . "
woe to thee , simon magus ! woe to you ,
his wretched followers ! who the things of god ,
which should be wedded unto goodness , them ,
rapacious as ye are , do prostitute
for gold and silver in adultery !
now must the trumpet sound for you , since yours
is the third chasm . upon the following vault
we now had mounted , where the rock impends
directly o'er the centre of the foss .
wisdom supreme ! how wonderful the art ,
which thou dost manifest in heaven , in earth ,
and in the evil world , how just a meed
allotting by thy virtue unto all !
i saw the livid stone , throughout the sides
and in its bottom full of apertures ,
all equal in their width , and circular each ,
nor ample less nor larger they appear'd
than in saint john's fair dome of me belov'd
those fram'd to hold the pure baptismal streams ,
one of the which i brake , some few years past ,
to save a whelming infant ; and be this
a seal to undeceive whoever doubts
the motive of my deed . from out the mouth
of every one , emerg'd a sinner's feet
and of the legs high upward as the calf
the rest beneath was hid . on either foot
the soles were burning , whence the flexile joints
glanc'd with such violent motion , as had snapt
asunder cords or twisted withs . as flame ,
feeding on unctuous matter , glides along
the surface , scarcely touching where it moves ;
so here , from heel to point , glided the flames .
" master ! say who is he , than all the rest
glancing in fiercer agony , on whom
a ruddier flame doth prey ? " i thus inquir'd .
" if thou be willing , " he replied , " that i
carry thee down , where least the slope bank falls ,
he of himself shall tell thee and his wrongs . "
i then : " as pleases thee to me is best .
thou art my lord ; and know'st that ne'er i quit
thy will : what silence hides that knowest thou . "
thereat on the fourth pier we came , we turn'd ,
and on our left descended to the depth ,
a narrow strait and perforated close .
nor from his side my leader set me down ,
till to his orifice he brought , whose limb
quiv'ring express'd his pang . " whoe'er thou art ,
sad spirit ! thus revers'd , and as a stake
driv'n in the soil ! " i in these words began ,
" if thou be able , utter forth thy voice . "
there stood i like the friar , that doth shrive
a wretch for murder doom'd , who e'en when fix'd ,
calleth him back , whence death awhile delays .
he shouted : " ha ! already standest there ?
already standest there , o boniface !
by many a year the writing play'd me false .
so early dost thou surfeit with the wealth ,
for which thou fearedst not in guile to take
the lovely lady , and then mangle her ? "
i felt as those who , piercing not the drift
of answer made them , stand as if expos'd
in mockery , nor know what to reply ,
when virgil thus admonish'd : " tell him quick ,
i am not he , not he , whom thou believ'st . "
and i , as was enjoin'd me , straight replied .
that heard , the spirit all did wrench his feet ,
and sighing next in woeful accent spake :
" what then of me requirest ? if to know
so much imports thee , who i am , that thou
hast therefore down the bank descended , learn
that in the mighty mantle i was rob'd ,
and of a she - bear was indeed the son ,
so eager to advance my whelps , that there
my having in my purse above i stow'd ,
and here myself . under my head are dragg'd
the rest , my predecessors in the guilt
of simony . stretch'd at their length they lie
along an opening in the rock . 'midst them
i also low shall fall , soon as he comes ,
for whom i took thee , when so hastily
i question'd . but already longer time
hath pass'd , since my souls kindled , and i thus
upturn'd have stood , than is his doom to stand
planted with fiery feet . for after him ,
one yet of deeds more ugly shall arrive ,
from forth the west , a shepherd without law ,
fated to cover both his form and mine .
he a new jason shall be call'd , of whom
in maccabees we read ; and favour such
as to that priest his king indulgent show'd ,
shall be of france's monarch shown to him . "
i know not if i here too far presum'd ,
but in this strain i answer'd : " tell me now ,
what treasures from st . peter at the first
our lord demanded , when he put the keys
into his charge ? surely he ask'd no more
but , follow me ! nor peter nor the rest
or gold or silver of matthias took ,
when lots were cast upon the forfeit place
of the condemned soul . abide thou then ;
thy punishment of right is merited :
and look thou well to that ill - gotten coin ,
which against charles thy hardihood inspir'd .
if reverence of the keys restrain'd me not ,
which thou in happier time didst hold , i yet
severer speech might use . your avarice
o'ercasts the world with mourning , under foot
treading the good , and raising bad men up .
of shepherds , like to you , th' evangelist
was ware , when her , who sits upon the waves ,
with kings in filthy whoredom he beheld ,
she who with seven heads tower'd at her birth ,
and from ten horns her proof of glory drew ,
long as her spouse in virtue took delight .
of gold and silver ye have made your god ,
diff'ring wherein from the idolater ,
but he that worships one , a hundred ye ?
ah , constantine ! to how much ill gave birth ,
not thy conversion , but that plenteous dower ,
which the first wealthy father gain'd from thee ! "
meanwhile , as thus i sung , he , whether wrath
or conscience smote him , violent upsprang
spinning on either sole . i do believe
my teacher well was pleas'd , with so compos'd
a lip , he listen'd ever to the sound
of the true words i utter'd . in both arms
he caught , and to his bosom lifting me
upward retrac'd the way of his descent .
nor weary of his weight he press'd me close ,
till to the summit of the rock we came ,
our passage from the fourth to the fifth pier .
his cherish'd burden there gently he plac'd
upon the rugged rock and steep , a path
not easy for the clamb'ring goat to mount .
thence to my view another vale appear'd
and now the verse proceeds to torments new ,
fit argument of this the twentieth strain
of the first song , whose awful theme records
the spirits whelm'd in woe . earnest i look'd
into the depth , that open'd to my view ,
moisten'd with tears of anguish , and beheld
a tribe , that came along the hollow vale ,
in silence weeping : such their step as walk
quires chanting solemn litanies on earth .
as on them more direct mine eye descends ,
each wondrously seem'd to be revers'd
at the neck - bone , so that the countenance
was from the reins averted : and because
none might before him look , they were compell'd
to' advance with backward gait . thus one perhaps
hath been by force of palsy clean transpos'd ,
but i ne'er saw it nor believe it so .
now , reader ! think within thyself , so god
fruit of thy reading give thee ! how i long
could keep my visage dry , when i beheld
near me our form distorted in such guise ,
that on the hinder parts fall'n from the face
the tears down - streaming roll'd . against a rock
i leant and wept , so that my guide exclaim'd :
" what , and art thou too witless as the rest ?
here pity most doth show herself alive ,
when she is dead . what guilt exceedeth his ,
who with heaven's judgment in his passion strives ?
raise up thy head , raise up , and see the man ,
before whose eyes earth gap'd in thebes , when all
cried out , 'amphiaraus , whither rushest ?
'why leavest thou the war ? ' he not the less
fell ruining far as to minos down ,
whose grapple none eludes . lo ! how he makes
the breast his shoulders , and who once too far
before him wish'd to see , now backward looks ,
and treads reverse his path . tiresias note ,
who semblance chang'd , when woman he became
of male , through every limb transform'd , and then
once more behov'd him with his rod to strike
the two entwining serpents , ere the plumes ,
that mark'd the better sex , might shoot again .
" aruns , with more his belly facing , comes .
on luni's mountains 'midst the marbles white ,
where delves carrara's hind , who wons beneath ,
a cavern was his dwelling , whence the stars
and main - sea wide in boundless view he held .
" the next , whose loosen'd tresses overspread
her bosom , which thou seest not ( for each hair
on that side grows ) was manto , she who search'd
through many regions , and at length her seat
fix'd in my native land , whence a short space
my words detain thy audience . when her sire
from life departed , and in servitude
the city dedicate to bacchus mourn'd ,
long time she went a wand'rer through the world .
aloft in italy's delightful land
a lake there lies , at foot of that proud alp ,
that o'er the tyrol locks germania in ,
its name benacus , which a thousand rills ,
methinks , and more , water between the vale
camonica and garda and the height
of apennine remote . there is a spot
at midway of that lake , where he who bears
of trento's flock the past'ral staff , with him
of brescia , and the veronese , might each
passing that way his benediction give .
a garrison of goodly site and strong
peschiera stands , to awe with front oppos'd
the bergamese and brescian , whence the shore
more slope each way descends . there , whatsoev'er
benacus' bosom holds not , tumbling o'er
down falls , and winds a river flood beneath
through the green pastures . soon as in his course
the steam makes head , benacus then no more
they call the name , but mincius , till at last
reaching governo into po he falls .
not far his course hath run , when a wide flat
it finds , which overstretchmg as a marsh
it covers , pestilent in summer oft .
hence journeying , the savage maiden saw
'midst of the fen a territory waste
and naked of inhabitants . to shun
all human converse , here she with her slaves
plying her arts remain'd , and liv'd , and left
her body tenantless . thenceforth the tribes ,
who round were scatter'd , gath'ring to that place
assembled ; for its strength was great , enclos'd
on all parts by the fen . on those dead bones
they rear'd themselves a city , for her sake ,
calling it mantua , who first chose the spot ,
nor ask'd another omen for the name ,
wherein more numerous the people dwelt ,
ere casalodi's madness by deceit
was wrong'd of pinamonte . if thou hear
henceforth another origin assign'd
of that my country , i forewarn thee now ,
that falsehood none beguile thee of the truth . "
i answer'd : " teacher , i conclude thy words
so certain , that all else shall be to me
as embers lacking life . but now of these ,
who here proceed , instruct me , if thou see
any that merit more especial note .
for thereon is my mind alone intent . "
he straight replied : " that spirit , from whose cheek
the beard sweeps o'er his shoulders brown , what time
graecia was emptied of her males , that scarce
the cradles were supplied , the seer was he
in aulis , who with calchas gave the sign
when first to cut the cable . him they nam'd
eurypilus : so sings my tragic strain ,
in which majestic measure well thou know'st ,
who know'st it all . that other , round the loins
so slender of his shape , was michael scot ,
practis'd in ev'ry slight of magic wile .
" guido bonatti see : asdente mark ,
who now were willing , he had tended still
the thread and cordwain ; and too late repents .
" see next the wretches , who the needle left ,
the shuttle and the spindle , and became
diviners : baneful witcheries they wrought
with images and herbs . but onward now :
for now doth cain with fork of thorns confine
on either hemisphere , touching the wave
beneath the towers of seville . yesternight
the moon was round . thou mayst remember well :
for she good service did thee in the gloom
of the deep wood . " this said , both onward mov'd .
thus we from bridge to bridge , with other talk ,
the which my drama cares not to rehearse ,
pass'd on ; and to the summit reaching , stood
to view another gap , within the round
of malebolge , other bootless pangs .
marvelous darkness shadow'd o'er the place .
in the venetians' arsenal as boils
through wintry months tenacious pitch , to smear
their unsound vessels ; for th' inclement time
sea - faring men restrains , and in that while
his bark one builds anew , another stops
the ribs of his , that hath made many a voyage ;
one hammers at the prow , one at the poop ;
this shapeth oars , that other cables twirls ,
the mizen one repairs and main - sail rent
so not by force of fire but art divine
boil'd here a glutinous thick mass , that round
lim'd all the shore beneath . i that beheld ,
but therein nought distinguish'd , save the surge ,
rais'd by the boiling , in one mighty swell
heave , and by turns subsiding and fall . while there
i fix'd my ken below , " mark ! mark ! " my guide
exclaiming , drew me towards him from the place ,
wherein i stood . i turn'd myself as one ,
impatient to behold that which beheld
he needs must shun , whom sudden fear unmans ,
that he his flight delays not for the view .
behind me i discern'd a devil black ,
that running , up advanc'd along the rock .
ah ! what fierce cruelty his look bespake !
in act how bitter did he seem , with wings
buoyant outstretch'd and feet of nimblest tread !
his shoulder proudly eminent and sharp
was with a sinner charg'd ; by either haunch
he held him , the foot's sinew griping fast .
" ye of our bridge ! " he cried , " keen - talon'd fiends !
lo ! one of santa zita's elders ! him
whelm ye beneath , while i return for more .
that land hath store of such . all men are there ,
except bonturo , barterers : of 'no'
for lucre there an 'aye' is quickly made . "
him dashing down , o'er the rough rock he turn'd ,
nor ever after thief a mastiff loos'd
sped with like eager haste . that other sank
and forthwith writing to the surface rose .
but those dark demons , shrouded by the bridge ,
cried " here the hallow'd visage saves not : here
is other swimming than in serchio's wave .
wherefore if thou desire we rend thee not ,
take heed thou mount not o'er the pitch . " this said ,
they grappled him with more than hundred hooks ,
and shouted : " cover'd thou must sport thee here ;
so , if thou canst , in secret mayst thou filch . "
e'en thus the cook bestirs him , with his grooms ,
to thrust the flesh into the caldron down
with flesh - hooks , that it float not on the top .
me then my guide bespake : " lest they descry ,
that thou art here , behind a craggy rock
bend low and screen thee ; and whate'er of force
be offer'd me , or insult , fear thou not :
for i am well advis'd , who have been erst
in the like fray . " beyond the bridge's head
therewith he pass'd , and reaching the sixth pier ,
behov'd him then a forehead terror - proof .
with storm and fury , as when dogs rush forth
upon the poor man's back , who suddenly
from whence he standeth makes his suit ; so rush'd
those from beneath the arch , and against him
their weapons all they pointed . he aloud :
" be none of you outrageous : ere your time
dare seize me , come forth from amongst you one ,
" who having heard my words , decide he then
if he shall tear these limbs . " they shouted loud ,
" go , malacoda ! " whereat one advanc'd ,
the others standing firm , and as he came ,
" what may this turn avail him ? " he exclaim'd .
" believ'st thou , malacoda ! i had come
thus far from all your skirmishing secure , "
my teacher answered , " without will divine
and destiny propitious ? pass we then
for so heaven's pleasure is , that i should lead
another through this savage wilderness . "
forthwith so fell his pride , that he let drop
the instrument of torture at his feet ,
and to the rest exclaim'd : " we have no power
to strike him . " then to me my guide : " o thou !
who on the bridge among the crags dost sit
low crouching , safely now to me return . "
i rose , and towards him moved with speed : the fiends
meantime all forward drew : me terror seiz'd
lest they should break the compact they had made .
thus issuing from caprona , once i saw
th' infantry dreading , lest his covenant
the foe should break ; so close he hemm'd them round .
i to my leader's side adher'd , mine eyes
with fixt and motionless observance bent
on their unkindly visage . they their hooks
protruding , one the other thus bespake :
" wilt thou i touch him on the hip ? " to whom
was answer'd : " even so ; nor miss thy aim . "
but he , who was in conf'rence with my guide ,
turn'd rapid round , and thus the demon spake :
" stay , stay thee , scarmiglione ! " then to us
he added : " further footing to your step
this rock affords not , shiver'd to the base
of the sixth arch . but would you still proceed ,
up by this cavern go : not distant far ,
another rock will yield you passage safe .
yesterday , later by five hours than now ,
twelve hundred threescore years and six had fill'd
the circuit of their course , since here the way
was broken . thitherward i straight dispatch
certain of these my scouts , who shall espy
if any on the surface bask . with them
go ye : for ye shall find them nothing fell .
come alichino forth , " with that he cried ,
" and calcabrina , and cagnazzo thou !
the troop of ten let barbariccia lead .
with libicocco draghinazzo haste ,
fang'd ciriatto , grafflacane fierce ,
and farfarello , and mad rubicant .
search ye around the bubbling tar . for these ,
in safety lead them , where the other crag
uninterrupted traverses the dens . "
i then : " o master ! what a sight is there !
ah ! without escort , journey we alone ,
which , if thou know the way , i covet not .
unless thy prudence fail thee , dost not mark
how they do gnarl upon us , and their scowl
threatens us present tortures ? " he replied :
" i charge thee fear not : let them , as they will ,
gnarl on : 't is but in token of their spite
against the souls , who mourn in torment steep'd . "
to leftward o'er the pier they turn'd ; but each
had first between his teeth prest close the tongue ,
toward their leader for a signal looking ,
which he with sound obscene triumphant gave .
it hath been heretofore my chance to see
horsemen with martial order shifting camp ,
to onset sallying , or in muster rang'd ,
or in retreat sometimes outstretch'd for flight ;
light - armed squadrons and fleet foragers
scouring thy plains , arezzo ! have i seen ,
and clashing tournaments , and tilting jousts ,
now with the sound of trumpets , now of bells ,
tabors , or signals made from castled heights ,
and with inventions multiform , our own ,
or introduc'd from foreign land ; but ne'er
to such a strange recorder i beheld ,
in evolution moving , horse nor foot ,
nor ship , that tack'd by sign from land or star .
with the ten demons on our way we went ;
ah fearful company ! but in the church
with saints , with gluttons at the tavern's mess .
still earnest on the pitch i gaz'd , to mark
all things whate'er the chasm contain'd , and those
who burn'd within . as dolphins , that , in sign
to mariners , heave high their arched backs ,
that thence forewarn'd they may advise to save
their threaten'd vessels ; so , at intervals ,
to ease the pain his back some sinner show'd ,
then hid more nimbly than the lightning glance .
e'en as the frogs , that of a wat'ry moat
stand at the brink , with the jaws only out ,
their feet and of the trunk all else concealed ,
thus on each part the sinners stood , but soon
as barbariccia was at hand , so they
drew back under the wave . i saw , and yet
my heart doth stagger , one , that waited thus ,
as it befalls that oft one frog remains ,
while the next springs away : and graffiacan ,
who of the fiends was nearest , grappling seiz'd
his clotted locks , and dragg'd him sprawling up ,
that he appear'd to me an otter . each
already by their names i knew , so well
when they were chosen , i observ'd , and mark'd
how one the other call'd . " o rubicant !
see that his hide thou with thy talons flay , "
shouted together all the cursed crew .
then i : " inform thee , master ! if thou may ,
what wretched soul is this , on whom their hand
his foes have laid . " my leader to his side
approach'd , and whence he came inquir'd , to whom
was answer'd thus : " born in navarre's domain
my mother plac'd me in a lord's retinue ,
for she had borne me to a losel vile ,
a spendthrift of his substance and himself .
the good king thibault after that i serv'd ,
to peculating here my thoughts were turn'd ,
whereof i give account in this dire heat . "
straight ciriatto , from whose mouth a tusk
issued on either side , as from a boar ,
ript him with one of these . 'twixt evil claws
the mouse had fall'n : but barbariccia cried ,
seizing him with both arms : " stand thou apart ,
while i do fix him on my prong transpierc'd . "
then added , turning to my guide his face ,
" inquire of him , if more thou wish to learn ,
ere he again be rent . " my leader thus :
" then tell us of the partners in thy guilt ;
knowest thou any sprung of latian land
under the tar ? " -- " i parted , " he replied ,
" but now from one , who sojourn'd not far thence ;
so were i under shelter now with him !
nor hook nor talon then should scare me more . " -- .
" too long we suffer , " libicocco cried ,
then , darting forth a prong , seiz'd on his arm ,
and mangled bore away the sinewy part .
him draghinazzo by his thighs beneath
would next have caught , whence angrily their chief ,
turning on all sides round , with threat'ning brow
restrain'd them . when their strife a little ceas'd ,
of him , who yet was gazing on his wound ,
my teacher thus without delay inquir'd :
" who was the spirit , from whom by evil hap
parting , as thou has told , thou cam'st to shore ? " --
" it was the friar gomita , " he rejoin'd ,
" he of gallura , vessel of all guile ,
who had his master's enemies in hand ,
and us'd them so that they commend him well .
money he took , and them at large dismiss'd .
so he reports : and in each other charge
committed to his keeping , play'd the part
of barterer to the height : with him doth herd
the chief of logodoro , michel zanche .
sardinia is a theme , whereof their tongue
is never weary . out ! alas ! behold
that other , how he grins ! more would i say ,
but tremble lest he mean to maul me sore . "
their captain then to farfarello turning ,
who roll'd his moony eyes in act to strike ,
rebuk'd him thus : " off ! cursed bird ! avaunt ! " --
" if ye desire to see or hear , " he thus
quaking with dread resum'd , " or tuscan spirits
or lombard , i will cause them to appear .
meantime let these ill talons bate their fury ,
so that no vengeance they may fear from them ,
and i , remaining in this self - same place ,
will for myself but one , make sev'n appear ,
when my shrill whistle shall be heard ; for so
our custom is to call each other up . "
cagnazzo at that word deriding grinn'd ,
then wagg'd the head and spake : " hear his device ,
mischievous as he is , to plunge him down . "
whereto he thus , who fail'd not in rich store
of nice - wove toils ; " mischief forsooth extreme ,
meant only to procure myself more woe ! "
no longer alichino then refrain'd ,
but thus , the rest gainsaying , him bespake :
" if thou do cast thee down , i not on foot
will chase thee , but above the pitch will beat
my plumes . quit we the vantage ground , and let
the bank be as a shield , that we may see
if singly thou prevail against us all . "
now , reader , of new sport expect to hear !
they each one turn'd his eyes to the' other shore ,
he first , who was the hardest to persuade .
the spirit of navarre chose well his time ,
planted his feet on land , and at one leap
escaping disappointed their resolve .
them quick resentment stung , but him the most ,
who was the cause of failure ; in pursuit
he therefore sped , exclaiming ; " thou art caught . "
but little it avail'd : terror outstripp'd
his following flight : the other plung'd beneath ,
and he with upward pinion rais'd his breast :
e'en thus the water - fowl , when she perceives
the falcon near , dives instant down , while he
enrag'd and spent retires . that mockery
in calcabrina fury stirr'd , who flew
after him , with desire of strife inflam'd ;
and , for the barterer had 'scap'd , so turn'd
his talons on his comrade . o'er the dyke
in grapple close they join'd ; but the' other prov'd
a goshawk able to rend well his foe ;
and in the boiling lake both fell . the heat
was umpire soon between them , but in vain
to lift themselves they strove , so fast were glued
their pennons . barbariccia , as the rest ,
that chance lamenting , four in flight dispatch'd
from the' other coast , with all their weapons arm'd .
they , to their post on each side speedily
descending , stretch'd their hooks toward the fiends ,
who flounder'd , inly burning from their scars :
and we departing left them to that broil .
in silence and in solitude we went ,
one first , the other following his steps ,
as minor friars journeying on their road .
the present fray had turn'd my thoughts to muse
upon old aesop's fable , where he told
what fate unto the mouse and frog befell .
for language hath not sounds more like in sense ,
than are these chances , if the origin
and end of each be heedfully compar'd .
and as one thought bursts from another forth ,
so afterward from that another sprang ,
which added doubly to my former fear .
for thus i reason'd : " these through us have been
so foil'd , with loss and mock'ry so complete ,
as needs must sting them sore . if anger then
be to their evil will conjoin'd , more fell
they shall pursue us , than the savage hound
snatches the leveret , panting 'twixt his jaws . "
already i perceiv'd my hair stand all
on end with terror , and look'd eager back .
" teacher , " i thus began , " if speedily
thyself and me thou hide not , much i dread
those evil talons . even now behind
they urge us : quick imagination works
so forcibly , that i already feel them . "
he answer'd : " were i form'd of leaded glass ,
i should not sooner draw unto myself
thy outward image , than i now imprint
that from within . this moment came thy thoughts
presented before mine , with similar act
and count'nance similar , so that from both
i one design have fram'd . if the right coast
incline so much , that we may thence descend
into the other chasm , we shall escape
secure from this imagined pursuit . "
he had not spoke his purpose to the end ,
when i from far beheld them with spread wings
approach to take us . suddenly my guide
caught me , ev'n as a mother that from sleep
is by the noise arous'd , and near her sees
the climbing fires , who snatches up her babe
and flies ne'er pausing , careful more of him
than of herself , that but a single vest
clings round her limbs . down from the jutting beach
supine he cast him , to that pendent rock ,
which closes on one part the other chasm .
never ran water with such hurrying pace
adown the tube to turn a landmill's wheel ,
when nearest it approaches to the spokes ,
as then along that edge my master ran ,
carrying me in his bosom , as a child ,
not a companion . scarcely had his feet
reach'd to the lowest of the bed beneath ,
when over us the steep they reach'd ; but fear
in him was none ; for that high providence ,
which plac'd them ministers of the fifth foss ,
power of departing thence took from them all .
there in the depth we saw a painted tribe ,
who pac'd with tardy steps around , and wept ,
faint in appearance and o'ercome with toil .
caps had they on , with hoods , that fell low down
before their eyes , in fashion like to those
worn by the monks in cologne . their outside
was overlaid with gold , dazzling to view ,
but leaden all within , and of such weight ,
that frederick's compar'd to these were straw .
oh , everlasting wearisome attire !
we yet once more with them together turn'd
to leftward , on their dismal moan intent .
but by the weight oppress'd , so slowly came
the fainting people , that our company
was chang'd at every movement of the step .
whence i my guide address'd : " see that thou find
some spirit , whose name may by his deeds be known ,
and to that end look round thee as thou go'st . "
then one , who understood the tuscan voice ,
cried after us aloud : " hold in your feet ,
ye who so swiftly speed through the dusk air .
perchance from me thou shalt obtain thy wish . "
whereat my leader , turning , me bespake :
" pause , and then onward at their pace proceed . "
i staid , and saw two spirits in whose look
impatient eagerness of mind was mark'd
to overtake me ; but the load they bare
and narrow path retarded their approach .
soon as arriv'd , they with an eye askance
perus'd me , but spake not : then turning each
to other thus conferring said : " this one
seems , by the action of his throat , alive .
and , be they dead , what privilege allows
they walk unmantled by the cumbrous stole ? "
then thus to me : " tuscan , who visitest
the college of the mourning hypocrites ,
disdain not to instruct us who thou art . "
" by arno's pleasant stream , " i thus replied ,
" in the great city i was bred and grew ,
and wear the body i have ever worn .
but who are ye , from whom such mighty grief ,
as now i witness , courseth down your cheeks ?
what torment breaks forth in this bitter woe ? "
" our bonnets gleaming bright with orange hue , "
one of them answer'd , " are so leaden gross ,
that with their weight they make the balances
to crack beneath them . joyous friars we were ,
bologna's natives , catalano i ,
he loderingo nam'd , and by thy land
together taken , as men used to take
a single and indifferent arbiter ,
to reconcile their strifes . how there we sped ,
gardingo's vicinage can best declare . "
" o friars ! " i began , " your miseries -- "
but there brake off , for one had caught my eye ,
fix'd to a cross with three stakes on the ground :
he , when he saw me , writh'd himself , throughout
distorted , ruffling with deep sighs his beard .
and catalano , who thereof was 'ware ,
thus spake : " that pierced spirit , whom intent
thou view'st , was he who gave the pharisees
counsel , that it were fitting for one man
to suffer for the people . he doth lie
transverse ; nor any passes , but him first
behoves make feeling trial how each weighs .
in straits like this along the foss are plac'd
the father of his consort , and the rest
partakers in that council , seed of ill
and sorrow to the jews . " i noted then ,
how virgil gaz'd with wonder upon him ,
thus abjectly extended on the cross
in banishment eternal . to the friar
he next his words address'd : " we pray ye tell ,
if so be lawful , whether on our right
lies any opening in the rock , whereby
we both may issue hence , without constraint
on the dark angels , that compell'd they come
to lead us from this depth . " he thus replied :
" nearer than thou dost hope , there is a rock
from the next circle moving , which o'ersteps
each vale of horror , save that here his cope
is shatter'd . by the ruin ye may mount :
for on the side it slants , and most the height
rises below . " with head bent down awhile
my leader stood , then spake : " he warn'd us ill ,
who yonder hangs the sinners on his hook . "
to whom the friar : at bologna erst
" i many vices of the devil heard ,
among the rest was said , 'he is a liar ,
and the father of lies ! ' " when he had spoke ,
my leader with large strides proceeded on ,
somewhat disturb'd with anger in his look .
i therefore left the spirits heavy laden ,
and following , his beloved footsteps mark'd .
in the year's early nonage , when the sun
tempers his tresses in aquarius' urn ,
and now towards equal day the nights recede ,
when as the rime upon the earth puts on
her dazzling sister's image , but not long
her milder sway endures , then riseth up
the village hind , whom fails his wintry store ,
and looking out beholds the plain around
all whiten'd , whence impatiently he smites
his thighs , and to his hut returning in ,
there paces to and fro , wailing his lot ,
as a discomfited and helpless man ;
then comes he forth again , and feels new hope
spring in his bosom , finding e'en thus soon
the world hath chang'd its count'nance , grasps his crook ,
and forth to pasture drives his little flock :
so me my guide dishearten'd when i saw
his troubled forehead , and so speedily
that ill was cur'd ; for at the fallen bridge
arriving , towards me with a look as sweet ,
he turn'd him back , as that i first beheld
at the steep mountain's foot . regarding well
the ruin , and some counsel first maintain'd
with his own thought , he open'd wide his arm
and took me up . as one , who , while he works ,
computes his labour's issue , that he seems
still to foresee the' effect , so lifting me
up to the summit of one peak , he fix'd
his eye upon another . " grapple that , "
said he , " but first make proof , if it be such
as will sustain thee . " for one capp'd with lead
this were no journey . scarcely he , though light ,
and i , though onward push'd from crag to crag ,
could mount . and if the precinct of this coast
were not less ample than the last , for him
i know not , but my strength had surely fail'd .
but malebolge all toward the mouth
inclining of the nethermost abyss ,
the site of every valley hence requires ,
that one side upward slope , the other fall .
at length the point of our descent we reach'd
from the last flag : soon as to that arriv'd ,
so was the breath exhausted from my lungs ,
i could no further , but did seat me there .
" now needs thy best of man ; " so spake my guide :
" for not on downy plumes , nor under shade
of canopy reposing , fame is won ,
without which whosoe'er consumes his days
leaveth such vestige of himself on earth ,
as smoke in air or foam upon the wave .
thou therefore rise : vanish thy weariness
by the mind's effort , in each struggle form'd
to vanquish , if she suffer not the weight
of her corporeal frame to crush her down .
a longer ladder yet remains to scale .
from these to have escap'd sufficeth not .
if well thou note me , profit by my words . "
i straightway rose , and show'd myself less spent
than i in truth did feel me . " on , " i cried ,
" for i am stout and fearless . " up the rock
our way we held , more rugged than before ,
narrower and steeper far to climb . from talk
i ceas'd not , as we journey'd , so to seem
least faint ; whereat a voice from the other foss
did issue forth , for utt'rance suited ill .
though on the arch that crosses there i stood ,
what were the words i knew not , but who spake
seem'd mov'd in anger . down i stoop'd to look ,
but my quick eye might reach not to the depth
for shrouding darkness ; wherefore thus i spake :
" to the next circle , teacher , bend thy steps ,
and from the wall dismount we ; for as hence
i hear and understand not , so i see
beneath , and naught discern . " -- " i answer not , "
said he , " but by the deed . to fair request
silent performance maketh best return . "
we from the bridge's head descended , where
to the eighth mound it joins , and then the chasm
opening to view , i saw a crowd within
of serpents terrible , so strange of shape
and hideous , that remembrance in my veins
yet shrinks the vital current . of her sands
let lybia vaunt no more : if jaculus ,
pareas and chelyder be her brood ,
cenchris and amphisboena , plagues so dire
or in such numbers swarming ne'er she shew'd ,
not with all ethiopia , and whate'er
above the erythraean sea is spawn'd .
amid this dread exuberance of woe
ran naked spirits wing'd with horrid fear ,
nor hope had they of crevice where to hide ,
or heliotrope to charm them out of view .
with serpents were their hands behind them bound ,
which through their reins infix'd the tail and head
twisted in folds before . and lo ! on one
near to our side , darted an adder up ,
and , where the neck is on the shoulders tied ,
transpierc'd him . far more quickly than e'er pen
wrote o or i , he kindled , burn'd , and chang'd
to ashes , all pour'd out upon the earth .
when there dissolv'd he lay , the dust again
uproll'd spontaneous , and the self - same form
instant resumed . so mighty sages tell ,
the' arabian phoenix , when five hundred years
have well nigh circled , dies , and springs forthwith
renascent . blade nor herb throughout his life
he tastes , but tears of frankincense alone
and odorous amomum : swaths of nard
and myrrh his funeral shroud . as one that falls ,
he knows not how , by force demoniac dragg'd
to earth , or through obstruction fettering up
in chains invisible the powers of man ,
who , risen from his trance , gazeth around ,
bewilder'd with the monstrous agony
he hath endur'd , and wildly staring sighs ;
so stood aghast the sinner when he rose .
oh ! how severe god's judgment , that deals out
such blows in stormy vengeance ! who he was
my teacher next inquir'd , and thus in few
he answer'd : " vanni fucci am i call'd ,
not long since rained down from tuscany
to this dire gullet . me the beastial life
and not the human pleas'd , mule that i was ,
who in pistoia found my worthy den . "
i then to virgil : " bid him stir not hence ,
and ask what crime did thrust him hither : once
a man i knew him choleric and bloody . "
the sinner heard and feign'd not , but towards me
his mind directing and his face , wherein
was dismal shame depictur'd , thus he spake :
" it grieves me more to have been caught by thee
in this sad plight , which thou beholdest , than
when i was taken from the other life .
i have no power permitted to deny
what thou inquirest . i am doom'd thus low
to dwell , for that the sacristy by me
was rifled of its goodly ornaments ,
and with the guilt another falsely charged .
but that thou mayst not joy to see me thus ,
so as thou e'er shalt 'scape this darksome realm
open thine ears and hear what i forebode .
reft of the neri first pistoia pines ,
then florence changeth citizens and laws .
from valdimagra , drawn by wrathful mars ,
a vapour rises , wrapt in turbid mists ,
and sharp and eager driveth on the storm
with arrowy hurtling o'er piceno's field ,
whence suddenly the cloud shall burst , and strike
each helpless bianco prostrate to the ground .
this have i told , that grief may rend thy heart . "
when he had spoke , the sinner rais'd his hands
pointed in mockery , and cried : " take them , god !
i level them at thee ! " from that day forth
the serpents were my friends ; for round his neck
one of then rolling twisted , as it said ,
" be silent , tongue ! " another to his arms
upgliding , tied them , riveting itself
so close , it took from them the power to move .
pistoia ! ah pistoia ! why dost doubt
to turn thee into ashes , cumb'ring earth
no longer , since in evil act so far
thou hast outdone thy seed ? i did not mark ,
through all the gloomy circles of the' abyss ,
spirit , that swell'd so proudly 'gainst his god ,
not him , who headlong fell from thebes . he fled ,
nor utter'd more ; and after him there came
a centaur full of fury , shouting , " where
where is the caitiff ? " on maremma's marsh
swarm not the serpent tribe , as on his haunch
they swarm'd , to where the human face begins .
behind his head upon the shoulders lay ,
with open wings , a dragon breathing fire
on whomsoe'er he met . to me my guide :
" cacus is this , who underneath the rock
of aventine spread oft a lake of blood .
he , from his brethren parted , here must tread
a different journey , for his fraudful theft
of the great herd , that near him stall'd ; whence found
his felon deeds their end , beneath the mace
of stout alcides , that perchance laid on
a hundred blows , and not the tenth was felt . "
while yet he spake , the centaur sped away :
and under us three spirits came , of whom
nor i nor he was ware , till they exclaim'd ;
" say who are ye ? " we then brake off discourse ,
intent on these alone . i knew them not ;
but , as it chanceth oft , befell , that one
had need to name another . " where , " said he ,
" doth cianfa lurk ? " i , for a sign my guide
should stand attentive , plac'd against my lips
the finger lifted . if , o reader ! now
thou be not apt to credit what i tell ,
no marvel ; for myself do scarce allow
the witness of mine eyes . but as i looked
toward them , lo ! a serpent with six feet
springs forth on one , and fastens full upon him :
his midmost grasp'd the belly , a forefoot
seiz'd on each arm ( while deep in either cheek
he flesh'd his fangs ) ; the hinder on the thighs
were spread , 'twixt which the tail inserted curl'd
upon the reins behind . ivy ne'er clasp'd
a dodder'd oak , as round the other's limbs
the hideous monster intertwin'd his own .
then , as they both had been of burning wax ,
each melted into other , mingling hues ,
that which was either now was seen no more .
thus up the shrinking paper , ere it burns ,
a brown tint glides , not turning yet to black ,
and the clean white expires . the other two
look'd on exclaiming : " ah , how dost thou change ,
agnello ! see ! thou art nor double now ,
" nor only one . " the two heads now became
one , and two figures blended in one form
appear'd , where both were lost . of the four lengths
two arms were made : the belly and the chest
the thighs and legs into such members chang'd ,
as never eye hath seen . of former shape
all trace was vanish'd . two yet neither seem'd
that image miscreate , and so pass'd on
with tardy steps . as underneath the scourge
of the fierce dog - star , that lays bare the fields ,
shifting from brake to brake , the lizard seems
a flash of lightning , if he thwart the road ,
so toward th' entrails of the other two
approaching seem'd , an adder all on fire ,
as the dark pepper - grain , livid and swart .
in that part , whence our life is nourish'd first ,
one he transpierc'd ; then down before him fell
stretch'd out . the pierced spirit look'd on him
but spake not ; yea stood motionless and yawn'd ,
as if by sleep or fev'rous fit assail'd .
he ey'd the serpent , and the serpent him .
one from the wound , the other from the mouth
breath'd a thick smoke , whose vap'ry columns join'd .
lucan in mute attention now may hear ,
nor thy disastrous fate , sabellus ! tell ,
nor shine , nasidius ! ovid now be mute .
what if in warbling fiction he record
cadmus and arethusa , to a snake
him chang'd , and her into a fountain clear ,
i envy not ; for never face to face
two natures thus transmuted did he sing ,
wherein both shapes were ready to assume
the other's substance . they in mutual guise
so answer'd , that the serpent split his train
divided to a fork , and the pierc'd spirit
drew close his steps together , legs and thighs
compacted , that no sign of juncture soon
was visible : the tail disparted took
the figure which the spirit lost , its skin
soft'ning , his indurated to a rind .
the shoulders next i mark'd , that ent'ring join'd
the monster's arm - pits , whose two shorter feet
so lengthen'd , as the other's dwindling shrunk .
the feet behind then twisting up became
that part that man conceals , which in the wretch
was cleft in twain . while both the shadowy smoke
with a new colour veils , and generates
th' excrescent pile on one , peeling it off
from th' other body , lo ! upon his feet
one upright rose , and prone the other fell .
not yet their glaring and malignant lamps
were shifted , though each feature chang'd beneath .
of him who stood erect , the mounting face
retreated towards the temples , and what there
superfluous matter came , shot out in ears
from the smooth cheeks , the rest , not backward dragg'd ,
of its excess did shape the nose ; and swell'd
into due size protuberant the lips .
he , on the earth who lay , meanwhile extends
his sharpen'd visage , and draws down the ears
into the head , as doth the slug his horns .
his tongue continuous before and apt
for utt'rance , severs ; and the other's fork
closing unites . that done the smoke was laid .
the soul , transform'd into the brute , glides off ,
hissing along the vale , and after him
the other talking sputters ; but soon turn'd
his new - grown shoulders on him , and in few
thus to another spake : " along this path
crawling , as i have done , speed buoso now ! "
so saw i fluctuate in successive change
th' unsteady ballast of the seventh hold :
and here if aught my tongue have swerv'd , events
so strange may be its warrant . o'er mine eyes
confusion hung , and on my thoughts amaze .
yet 'scap'd they not so covertly , but well
i mark'd sciancato : he alone it was
of the three first that came , who chang'd not : thou ,
the other's fate , gaville , still dost rue .
florence exult ! for thou so mightily
hast thriven , that o'er land and sea thy wings
thou beatest , and thy name spreads over hell !
among the plund'rers such the three i found
thy citizens , whence shame to me thy son ,
and no proud honour to thyself redounds .
but if our minds , when dreaming near the dawn ,
are of the truth presageful , thou ere long
shalt feel what prato , ( not to say the rest )
would fain might come upon thee ; and that chance
were in good time , if it befell thee now .
would so it were , since it must needs befall !
for as time wears me , i shall grieve the more .
we from the depth departed ; and my guide
remounting scal'd the flinty steps , which late
we downward trac'd , and drew me up the steep .
pursuing thus our solitary way
among the crags and splinters of the rock ,
sped not our feet without the help of hands .
then sorrow seiz'd me , which e'en now revives ,
as my thought turns again to what i saw ,
and , more than i am wont , i rein and curb
the powers of nature in me , lest they run
where virtue guides not ; that if aught of good
my gentle star , or something better gave me ,
i envy not myself the precious boon .
as in that season , when the sun least veils
his face that lightens all , what time the fly
gives way to the shrill gnat , the peasant then
upon some cliff reclin'd , beneath him sees
fire - flies innumerous spangling o'er the vale ,
vineyard or tilth , where his day - labour lies :
with flames so numberless throughout its space
shone the eighth chasm , apparent , when the depth
was to my view expos'd . as he , whose wrongs
the bears aveng'd , at its departure saw
elijah's chariot , when the steeds erect
rais'd their steep flight for heav'n ; his eyes meanwhile ,
straining pursu'd them , till the flame alone
upsoaring like a misty speck he kenn'd ;
e'en thus along the gulf moves every flame ,
a sinner so enfolded close in each ,
that none exhibits token of the theft .
upon the bridge i forward bent to look ,
and grasp'd a flinty mass , or else had fall'n ,
though push'd not from the height . the guide , who mark'd
how i did gaze attentive , thus began :
" within these ardours are the spirits , each
swath'd in confining fire . " -- " master , thy word , "
i answer'd , " hath assur'd me ; yet i deem'd
already of the truth , already wish'd
to ask thee , who is in yon fire , that comes
so parted at the summit , as it seem'd
ascending from that funeral pile , where lay
the theban brothers ? " he replied : " within
ulysses there and diomede endure
their penal tortures , thus to vengeance now
together hasting , as erewhile to wrath .
these in the flame with ceaseless groans deplore
the ambush of the horse , that open'd wide
a portal for that goodly seed to pass ,
which sow'd imperial rome ; nor less the guile
lament they , whence of her achilles 'reft
deidamia yet in death complains .
and there is rued the stratagem , that troy
of her palladium spoil'd . " -- " if they have power
of utt'rance from within these sparks , " said i ,
" o master ! think my prayer a thousand fold
in repetition urg'd , that thou vouchsafe
to pause , till here the horned flame arrive .
see , how toward it with desire i bend . "
he thus : " thy prayer is worthy of much praise ,
and i accept it therefore : but do thou
thy tongue refrain : to question them be mine ,
for i divine thy wish : and they perchance ,
for they were greeks , might shun discourse with thee . "
when there the flame had come , where time and place
seem'd fitting to my guide , he thus began :
" o ye , who dwell two spirits in one fire !
if living i of you did merit aught ,
whate'er the measure were of that desert ,
when in the world my lofty strain i pour'd ,
move ye not on , till one of you unfold
in what clime death o'ertook him self - destroy'd . "
of the old flame forthwith the greater horn
began to roll , murmuring , as a fire
that labours with the wind , then to and fro
wagging the top , as a tongue uttering sounds ,
threw out its voice , and spake : " when i escap'd
from circe , who beyond a circling year
had held me near caieta , by her charms ,
ere thus aeneas yet had nam'd the shore ,
nor fondness for my son , nor reverence
of my old father , nor return of love ,
that should have crown'd penelope with joy ,
could overcome in me the zeal i had
t' explore the world , and search the ways of life ,
man's evil and his virtue . forth i sail'd
into the deep illimitable main ,
with but one bark , and the small faithful band
that yet cleav'd to me . as iberia far ,
far as morocco either shore i saw ,
and the sardinian and each isle beside
which round that ocean bathes . tardy with age
were i and my companions , when we came
to the strait pass , where hercules ordain'd
the bound'ries not to be o'erstepp'd by man .
the walls of seville to my right i left ,
on the' other hand already ceuta past .
" o brothers ! " i began , " who to the west
through perils without number now have reach'd ,
to this the short remaining watch , that yet
our senses have to wake , refuse not proof
of the unpeopled world , following the track
of phoebus . call to mind from whence we sprang :
ye were not form'd to live the life of brutes
but virtue to pursue and knowledge high .
with these few words i sharpen'd for the voyage
the mind of my associates , that i then
could scarcely have withheld them . to the dawn
our poop we turn'd , and for the witless flight
made our oars wings , still gaining on the left .
each star of the' other pole night now beheld ,
and ours so low , that from the ocean - floor
it rose not . five times re - illum'd , as oft
vanish'd the light from underneath the moon
since the deep way we enter'd , when from far
appear'd a mountain dim , loftiest methought
of all i e'er beheld . joy seiz'd us straight ,
but soon to mourning changed . from the new land
a whirlwind sprung , and at her foremost side
did strike the vessel . thrice it whirl'd her round
with all the waves , the fourth time lifted up
the poop , and sank the prow : so fate decreed :
and over us the booming billow clos'd . "
now upward rose the flame , and still'd its light
to speak no more , and now pass'd on with leave
from the mild poet gain'd , when following came
another , from whose top a sound confus'd ,
forth issuing , drew our eyes that way to look .
as the sicilian bull , that rightfully
his cries first echoed , who had shap'd its mould ,
did so rebellow , with the voice of him
tormented , that the brazen monster seem'd
pierc'd through with pain ; thus while no way they found
nor avenue immediate through the flame ,
into its language turn'd the dismal words :
but soon as they had won their passage forth ,
up from the point , which vibrating obey'd
their motion at the tongue , these sounds we heard :
" o thou ! to whom i now direct my voice !
that lately didst exclaim in lombard phrase ,
" depart thou , i solicit thee no more ,
though somewhat tardy i perchance arrive
let it not irk thee here to pause awhile ,
and with me parley : lo ! it irks not me
and yet i burn . if but e'en now thou fall
into this blind world , from that pleasant land
of latium , whence i draw my sum of guilt ,
tell me if those , who in romagna dwell ,
have peace or war . for of the mountains there
was i , betwixt urbino and the height ,
whence tyber first unlocks his mighty flood . "
leaning i listen'd yet with heedful ear ,
when , as he touch'd my side , the leader thus :
" speak thou : he is a latian . " my reply
was ready , and i spake without delay :
" o spirit ! who art hidden here below !
never was thy romagna without war
in her proud tyrants' bosoms , nor is now :
but open war there left i none . the state ,
ravenna hath maintain'd this many a year ,
is steadfast . there polenta's eagle broods ,
and in his broad circumference of plume
o'ershadows cervia . the green talons grasp
the land , that stood erewhile the proof so long ,
and pil'd in bloody heap the host of france .
" the' old mastiff of verruchio and the young ,
that tore montagna in their wrath , still make ,
where they are wont , an augre of their fangs .
" lamone's city and santerno's range
under the lion of the snowy lair .
inconstant partisan ! that changeth sides ,
or ever summer yields to winter's frost .
and she , whose flank is wash'd of savio's wave ,
as 'twixt the level and the steep she lies ,
lives so 'twixt tyrant power and liberty .
" now tell us , i entreat thee , who art thou ?
be not more hard than others . in the world ,
so may thy name still rear its forehead high . "
then roar'd awhile the fire , its sharpen'd point
on either side wav'd , and thus breath'd at last :
" if i did think , my answer were to one ,
who ever could return unto the world ,
this flame should rest unshaken . but since ne'er ,
if true be told me , any from this depth
has found his upward way , i answer thee ,
nor fear lest infamy record the words .
" a man of arms at first , i cloth'd me then
in good saint francis' girdle , hoping so
t' have made amends . and certainly my hope
had fail'd not , but that he , whom curses light on ,
the' high priest again seduc'd me into sin .
and how and wherefore listen while i tell .
long as this spirit mov'd the bones and pulp
my mother gave me , less my deeds bespake
the nature of the lion than the fox .
all ways of winding subtlety i knew ,
and with such art conducted , that the sound
reach'd the world's limit . soon as to that part
of life i found me come , when each behoves
to lower sails and gather in the lines ;
that which before had pleased me then i rued ,
and to repentance and confession turn'd ;
wretch that i was ! and well it had bested me !
the chief of the new pharisees meantime ,
waging his warfare near the lateran ,
not with the saracens or jews ( his foes
all christians were , nor against acre one
had fought , nor traffic'd in the soldan's land ) ,
he his great charge nor sacred ministry
in himself , rev'renc'd , nor in me that cord ,
which us'd to mark with leanness whom it girded .
as in socrate , constantine besought
to cure his leprosy sylvester's aid ,
so me to cure the fever of his pride
this man besought : my counsel to that end
he ask'd : and i was silent : for his words
seem'd drunken : but forthwith he thus resum'd :
'from thy heart banish fear : of all offence
i hitherto absolve thee . in return ,
teach me my purpose so to execute ,
that penestrino cumber earth no more .
heav'n , as thou knowest , i have power to shut
and open : and the keys are therefore twain ,
the which my predecessor meanly priz'd . ' "
then , yielding to the forceful arguments ,
of silence as more perilous i deem'd ,
and answer'd : " father ! since thou washest me
clear of that guilt wherein i now must fall ,
large promise with performance scant , be sure ,
shall make thee triumph in thy lofty seat . "
" when i was number'd with the dead , then came
saint francis for me ; but a cherub dark
he met , who cried : 'wrong me not ; he is mine ,
and must below to join the wretched crew ,
for the deceitful counsel which he gave .
e'er since i watch'd him , hov'ring at his hair ,
no power can the impenitent absolve ;
nor to repent and will at once consist ,
by contradiction absolute forbid . ' "
oh mis'ry ! how i shook myself , when he
seiz'd me , and cried , " thou haply thought'st me not
a disputant in logic so exact . "
to minos down he bore me , and the judge
twin'd eight times round his callous back the tail ,
which biting with excess of rage , he spake :
" this is a guilty soul , that in the fire
must vanish . hence perdition - doom'd i rove
a prey to rankling sorrow in this garb . "
when he had thus fulfill'd his words , the flame
in dolour parted , beating to and fro ,
and writhing its sharp horn . we onward went ,
i and my leader , up along the rock ,
far as another arch , that overhangs
the foss , wherein the penalty is paid
of those , who load them with committed sin .
who , e'en in words unfetter'd , might at full
tell of the wounds and blood that now i saw ,
though he repeated oft the tale ? no tongue
so vast a theme could equal , speech and thought
both impotent alike . if in one band
collected , stood the people all , who e'er
pour'd on apulia's happy soil their blood ,
slain by the trojans , and in that long war
when of the rings the measur'd booty made
a pile so high , as rome's historian writes
who errs not , with the multitude , that felt
the grinding force of guiscard's norman steel ,
and those the rest , whose bones are gather'd yet
at ceperano , there where treachery
branded th' apulian name , or where beyond
thy walls , o tagliacozzo , without arms
the old alardo conquer'd ; and his limbs
one were to show transpierc'd , another his
clean lopt away ; a spectacle like this
were but a thing of nought , to the' hideous sight
of the ninth chasm . a rundlet , that hath lost
its middle or side stave , gapes not so wide ,
as one i mark'd , torn from the chin throughout
down to the hinder passage : 'twixt the legs
dangling his entrails hung , the midriff lay
open to view , and wretched ventricle ,
that turns th' englutted aliment to dross .
whilst eagerly i fix on him my gaze ,
he ey'd me , with his hands laid his breast bare ,
and cried ; " now mark how i do rip me ! lo !
" how is mohammed mangled ! before me
walks ali weeping , from the chin his face
cleft to the forelock ; and the others all
whom here thou seest , while they liv'd , did sow
scandal and schism , and therefore thus are rent .
a fiend is here behind , who with his sword
hacks us thus cruelly , slivering again
each of this ream , when we have compast round
the dismal way , for first our gashes close
ere we repass before him . but say who
art thou , that standest musing on the rock ,
haply so lingering to delay the pain
sentenc'd upon thy crimes ? " -- " him death not yet , "
my guide rejoin'd , " hath overta'en , nor sin
conducts to torment ; but , that he may make
full trial of your state , i who am dead
must through the depths of hell , from orb to orb ,
conduct him . trust my words , for they are true . "
more than a hundred spirits , when that they heard ,
stood in the foss to mark me , through amazed ,
forgetful of their pangs . " thou , who perchance
shalt shortly view the sun , this warning thou
bear to dolcino : bid him , if he wish not
here soon to follow me , that with good store
of food he arm him , lest impris'ning snows
yield him a victim to novara's power ,
no easy conquest else . " with foot uprais'd
for stepping , spake mohammed , on the ground
then fix'd it to depart . another shade ,
pierc'd in the throat , his nostrils mutilate
e'en from beneath the eyebrows , and one ear
lopt off , who with the rest through wonder stood
gazing , before the rest advanc'd , and bar'd
his wind - pipe , that without was all o'ersmear'd
with crimson stain . " o thou ! " said he , " whom sin
condemns not , and whom erst ( unless too near
resemblance do deceive me ) i aloft
have seen on latian ground , call thou to mind
piero of medicina , if again
returning , thou behold'st the pleasant land
that from vercelli slopes to mercabo ;
" and there instruct the twain , whom fano boasts
her worthiest sons , guido and angelo ,
that if 't is giv'n us here to scan aright
the future , they out of life's tenement
shall be cast forth , and whelm'd under the waves
near to cattolica , through perfidy
of a fell tyrant . 'twixt the cyprian isle
and balearic , ne'er hath neptune seen
an injury so foul , by pirates done
or argive crew of old . that one - ey'd traitor
( whose realm there is a spirit here were fain
his eye had still lack'd sight of ) them shall bring
to conf'rence with him , then so shape his end ,
that they shall need not 'gainst focara's wind
offer up vow nor pray'r . " i answering thus :
" declare , as thou dost wish that i above
may carry tidings of thee , who is he ,
in whom that sight doth wake such sad remembrance ? "
forthwith he laid his hand on the cheek - bone
of one , his fellow - spirit , and his jaws
expanding , cried : " lo ! this is he i wot of ;
he speaks not for himself : the outcast this
who overwhelm'd the doubt in caesar's mind ,
affirming that delay to men prepar'd
was ever harmful . " oh how terrified
methought was curio , from whose throat was cut
the tongue , which spake that hardy word . then one
maim'd of each hand , uplifted in the gloom
the bleeding stumps , that they with gory spots
sullied his face , and cried : " 'remember thee
of mosca , too , i who , alas ! exclaim'd ,
'the deed once done there is an end , ' that prov'd
a seed of sorrow to the tuscan race . "
i added : " ay , and death to thine own tribe . "
whence heaping woe on woe he hurried off ,
as one grief stung to madness . but i there
still linger'd to behold the troop , and saw
things , such as i may fear without more proof
to tell of , but that conscience makes me firm ,
the boon companion , who her strong breast - plate
buckles on him , that feels no guilt within
and bids him on and fear not . without doubt
i saw , and yet it seems to pass before me ,
a headless trunk , that even as the rest
of the sad flock pac'd onward . by the hair
it bore the sever'd member , lantern - wise
pendent in hand , which look'd at us and said ,
" woe's me ! " the spirit lighted thus himself ,
and two there were in one , and one in two .
how that may be he knows who ordereth so .
when at the bridge's foot direct he stood ,
his arm aloft he rear'd , thrusting the head
full in our view , that nearer we might hear
the words , which thus it utter'd : " now behold
this grievous torment , thou , who breathing go'st
to spy the dead ; behold if any else
be terrible as this . and that on earth
thou mayst bear tidings of me , know that i
am bertrand , he of born , who gave king john
the counsel mischievous . father and son
i set at mutual war . for absalom
and david more did not ahitophel ,
spurring them on maliciously to strife .
for parting those so closely knit , my brain
parted , alas ! i carry from its source ,
that in this trunk inhabits . thus the law
of retribution fiercely works in me . "
so were mine eyes inebriate with view
of the vast multitude , whom various wounds
disfigur'd , that they long'd to stay and weep .
but virgil rous'd me : " what yet gazest on ?
wherefore doth fasten yet thy sight below
among the maim'd and miserable shades ?
thou hast not shewn in any chasm beside
this weakness . know , if thou wouldst number them
that two and twenty miles the valley winds
its circuit , and already is the moon
beneath our feet : the time permitted now
is short , and more not seen remains to see . "
" if thou , " i straight replied , " hadst weigh'd the cause
for which i look'd , thou hadst perchance excus'd
the tarrying still . " my leader part pursu'd
his way , the while i follow'd , answering him ,
and adding thus : " within that cave i deem ,
whereon so fixedly i held my ken ,
there is a spirit dwells , one of my blood ,
wailing the crime that costs him now so dear . "
then spake my master : " let thy soul no more
afflict itself for him . direct elsewhere
its thought , and leave him . at the bridge's foot
i mark'd how he did point with menacing look
at thee , and heard him by the others nam'd
geri of bello . thou so wholly then
wert busied with his spirit , who once rul'd
the towers of hautefort , that thou lookedst not
that way , ere he was gone . " -- " o guide belov'd !
his violent death yet unaveng'd , " said i ,
" by any , who are partners in his shame ,
made him contemptuous : therefore , as i think ,
he pass'd me speechless by ; and doing so
hath made me more compassionate his fate . "
so we discours'd to where the rock first show'd
the other valley , had more light been there ,
e'en to the lowest depth . soon as we came
o'er the last cloister in the dismal rounds
of malebolge , and the brotherhood
were to our view expos'd , then many a dart
of sore lament assail'd me , headed all
with points of thrilling pity , that i clos'd
both ears against the volley with mine hands .
as were the torment , if each lazar - house
of valdichiana , in the sultry time
'twixt july and september , with the isle
sardinia and maremma's pestilent fen ,
had heap'd their maladies all in one foss
together ; such was here the torment : dire
the stench , as issuing steams from fester'd limbs .
we on the utmost shore of the long rock
descended still to leftward . then my sight
was livelier to explore the depth , wherein
the minister of the most mighty lord ,
all - searching justice , dooms to punishment
the forgers noted on her dread record .
more rueful was it not methinks to see
the nation in aegina droop , what time
each living thing , e'en to the little worm ,
all fell , so full of malice was the air
( and afterward , as bards of yore have told ,
the ancient people were restor'd anew
from seed of emmets ) than was here to see
the spirits , that languish'd through the murky vale
up - pil'd on many a stack . confus'd they lay ,
one o'er the belly , o'er the shoulders one
roll'd of another ; sideling crawl'd a third
along the dismal pathway . step by step
we journey'd on , in silence looking round
and list'ning those diseas'd , who strove in vain
to lift their forms . then two i mark'd , that sat
propp'd 'gainst each other , as two brazen pans
set to retain the heat . from head to foot ,
a tetter bark'd them round . nor saw i e'er
groom currying so fast , for whom his lord
impatient waited , or himself perchance
tir'd with long watching , as of these each one
plied quickly his keen nails , through furiousness
of ne'er abated pruriency . the crust
came drawn from underneath in flakes , like scales
scrap'd from the bream or fish of broader mail .
" o thou , who with thy fingers rendest off
thy coat of proof , " thus spake my guide to one ,
" and sometimes makest tearing pincers of them ,
tell me if any born of latian land
be among these within : so may thy nails
serve thee for everlasting to this toil . "
" both are of latium , " weeping he replied ,
" whom tortur'd thus thou seest : but who art thou
that hast inquir'd of us ? " to whom my guide :
" one that descend with this man , who yet lives ,
from rock to rock , and show him hell's abyss . "
then started they asunder , and each turn'd
trembling toward us , with the rest , whose ear
those words redounding struck . to me my liege
address'd him : " speak to them whate'er thou list . "
and i therewith began : " so may no time
filch your remembrance from the thoughts of men
in th' upper world , but after many suns
survive it , as ye tell me , who ye are ,
and of what race ye come . your punishment ,
unseemly and disgustful in its kind ,
deter you not from opening thus much to me . "
" arezzo was my dwelling , " answer'd one ,
" and me albero of sienna brought
to die by fire ; but that , for which i died ,
leads me not here . true is in sport i told him ,
that i had learn'd to wing my flight in air .
and he admiring much , as he was void
of wisdom , will'd me to declare to him
the secret of mine art : and only hence ,
because i made him not a daedalus ,
prevail'd on one suppos'd his sire to burn me .
but minos to this chasm last of the ten ,
for that i practis'd alchemy on earth ,
has doom'd me . him no subterfuge eludes . "
then to the bard i spake : " was ever race
light as sienna's ? sure not france herself
can show a tribe so frivolous and vain . "
the other leprous spirit heard my words ,
and thus return'd : " be stricca from this charge
exempted , he who knew so temp'rately
to lay out fortune's gifts ; and niccolo
who first the spice's costly luxury
discover'd in that garden , where such seed
roots deepest in the soil : and be that troop
exempted , with whom caccia of asciano
lavish'd his vineyards and wide - spreading woods ,
and his rare wisdom abbagliato show'd
a spectacle for all . that thou mayst know
who seconds thee against the siennese
thus gladly , bend this way thy sharpen'd sight ,
that well my face may answer to thy ken ;
so shalt thou see i am capocchio's ghost ,
who forg'd transmuted metals by the power
of alchemy ; and if i scan thee right ,
thus needs must well remember how i aped
creative nature by my subtle art . "
what time resentment burn'd in juno's breast
for semele against the theban blood ,
as more than once in dire mischance was rued ,
such fatal frenzy seiz'd on athamas ,
that he his spouse beholding with a babe
laden on either arm , " spread out , " he cried ,
" the meshes , that i take the lioness
and the young lions at the pass : " then forth
stretch'd he his merciless talons , grasping one ,
one helpless innocent , learchus nam'd ,
whom swinging down he dash'd upon a rock ,
and with her other burden self - destroy'd
the hapless mother plung'd : and when the pride
of all - presuming troy fell from its height ,
by fortune overwhelm'd , and the old king
with his realm perish'd , then did hecuba ,
a wretch forlorn and captive , when she saw
polyxena first slaughter'd , and her son ,
her polydorus , on the wild sea - beach
next met the mourner's view , then reft of sense
did she run barking even as a dog ;
such mighty power had grief to wrench her soul .
bet ne'er the furies or of thebes or troy
with such fell cruelty were seen , their goads
infixing in the limbs of man or beast ,
as now two pale and naked ghost i saw
that gnarling wildly scamper'd , like the swine
excluded from his stye . one reach'd capocchio ,
and in the neck - joint sticking deep his fangs ,
dragg'd him , that o'er the solid pavement rubb'd
his belly stretch'd out prone . the other shape ,
he of arezzo , there left trembling , spake ;
" that sprite of air is schicchi ; in like mood
of random mischief vent he still his spite . "
to whom i answ'ring : " oh ! as thou dost hope ,
the other may not flesh its jaws on thee ,
be patient to inform us , who it is ,
ere it speed hence . " -- " that is the ancient soul
of wretched myrrha , " he replied , " who burn'd
with most unholy flame for her own sire ,
" and a false shape assuming , so perform'd
the deed of sin ; e'en as the other there ,
that onward passes , dar'd to counterfeit
donati's features , to feign'd testament
the seal affixing , that himself might gain ,
for his own share , the lady of the herd . "
when vanish'd the two furious shades , on whom
mine eye was held , i turn'd it back to view
the other cursed spirits . one i saw
in fashion like a lute , had but the groin
been sever'd , where it meets the forked part .
swoln dropsy , disproportioning the limbs
with ill - converted moisture , that the paunch
suits not the visage , open'd wide his lips
gasping as in the hectic man for drought ,
one towards the chin , the other upward curl'd .
" o ye , who in this world of misery ,
wherefore i know not , are exempt from pain , "
thus he began , " attentively regard
adamo's woe . when living , full supply
ne'er lack'd me of what most i coveted ;
one drop of water now , alas ! i crave .
the rills , that glitter down the grassy slopes
of casentino , making fresh and soft
the banks whereby they glide to arno's stream ,
stand ever in my view ; and not in vain ;
for more the pictur'd semblance dries me up ,
much more than the disease , which makes the flesh
desert these shrivel'd cheeks . so from the place ,
where i transgress'd , stern justice urging me ,
takes means to quicken more my lab'ring sighs .
there is romena , where i falsified
the metal with the baptist's form imprest ,
for which on earth i left my body burnt .
but if i here might see the sorrowing soul
of guido , alessandro , or their brother ,
for branda's limpid spring i would not change
the welcome sight . one is e'en now within ,
if truly the mad spirits tell , that round
are wand'ring . but wherein besteads me that ?
my limbs are fetter'd . were i but so light ,
that i each hundred years might move one inch ,
i had set forth already on this path ,
seeking him out amidst the shapeless crew ,
although eleven miles it wind , not more
than half of one across . they brought me down
among this tribe ; induc'd by them i stamp'd
the florens with three carats of alloy . "
" who are that abject pair , " i next inquir'd ,
" that closely bounding thee upon thy right
lie smoking , like a band in winter steep'd
in the chill stream ? " -- " when to this gulf i dropt , "
he answer'd , " here i found them ; since that hour
they have not turn'd , nor ever shall , i ween ,
till time hath run his course . one is that dame
the false accuser of the hebrew youth ;
sinon the other , that false greek from troy .
sharp fever drains the reeky moistness out ,
in such a cloud upsteam'd . " when that he heard ,
one , gall'd perchance to be so darkly nam'd ,
with clench'd hand smote him on the braced paunch ,
that like a drum resounded : but forthwith
adamo smote him on the face , the blow
returning with his arm , that seem'd as hard .
" though my o'erweighty limbs have ta'en from me
the power to move , " said he , " i have an arm
at liberty for such employ . " to whom
was answer'd : " when thou wentest to the fire ,
thou hadst it not so ready at command ,
then readier when it coin'd th' impostor gold . "
and thus the dropsied : " ay , now speak'st thou true .
but there thou gav'st not such true testimony ,
when thou wast question'd of the truth , at troy . "
" if i spake false , thou falsely stamp'dst the coin , "
said sinon ; " i am here but for one fault ,
and thou for more than any imp beside . "
" remember , " he replied , " o perjur'd one ,
the horse remember , that did teem with death ,
and all the world be witness to thy guilt . "
" to thine , " return'd the greek , " witness the thirst
whence thy tongue cracks , witness the fluid mound ,
rear'd by thy belly up before thine eyes ,
a mass corrupt . " to whom the coiner thus :
" thy mouth gapes wide as ever to let pass
its evil saying . me if thirst assails ,
yet i am stuff'd with moisture . thou art parch'd ,
pains rack thy head , no urging would'st thou need
to make thee lap narcissus' mirror up . "
i was all fix'd to listen , when my guide
admonish'd : " now beware : a little more .
and i do quarrel with thee . " i perceiv'd
how angrily he spake , and towards him turn'd
with shame so poignant , as remember'd yet
confounds me . as a man that dreams of harm
befall'n him , dreaming wishes it a dream ,
and that which is , desires as if it were not ,
such then was i , who wanting power to speak
wish'd to excuse myself , and all the while
excus'd me , though unweeting that i did .
" more grievous fault than thine has been , less shame , "
my master cried , " might expiate . therefore cast
all sorrow from thy soul ; and if again
chance bring thee , where like conference is held ,
think i am ever at thy side . to hear
such wrangling is a joy for vulgar minds . "
the very tongue , whose keen reproof before
had wounded me , that either cheek was stain'd ,
now minister'd my cure . so have i heard ,
achilles and his father's javelin caus'd
pain first , and then the boon of health restor'd .
turning our back upon the vale of woe ,
w cross'd th' encircled mound in silence . there
was twilight dim , that far long the gloom
mine eye advanc'd not : but i heard a horn
sounded aloud . the peal it blew had made
the thunder feeble . following its course
the adverse way , my strained eyes were bent
on that one spot . so terrible a blast
orlando blew not , when that dismal rout
o'erthrew the host of charlemagne , and quench'd
his saintly warfare . thitherward not long
my head was rais'd , when many lofty towers
methought i spied . " master , " said i , " what land
is this ? " he answer'd straight : " too long a space
of intervening darkness has thine eye
to traverse : thou hast therefore widely err'd
in thy imagining . thither arriv'd
thou well shalt see , how distance can delude
the sense . a little therefore urge thee on . "
then tenderly he caught me by the hand ;
" yet know , " said he , " ere farther we advance ,
that it less strange may seem , these are not towers ,
but giants . in the pit they stand immers'd ,
each from his navel downward , round the bank . "
as when a fog disperseth gradually ,
our vision traces what the mist involves
condens'd in air ; so piercing through the gross
and gloomy atmosphere , as more and more
we near'd toward the brink , mine error fled ,
and fear came o'er me . as with circling round
of turrets , montereggion crowns his walls ,
e'en thus the shore , encompassing th' abyss ,
was turreted with giants , half their length
uprearing , horrible , whom jove from heav'n
yet threatens , when his mutt'ring thunder rolls .
of one already i descried the face ,
shoulders , and breast , and of the belly huge
great part , and both arms down along his ribs .
all - teeming nature , when her plastic hand
left framing of these monsters , did display
past doubt her wisdom , taking from mad war
such slaves to do his bidding ; and if she
repent her not of th' elephant and whale ,
who ponders well confesses her therein
wiser and more discreet ; for when brute force
and evil will are back'd with subtlety ,
resistance none avails . his visage seem'd
in length and bulk , as doth the pine , that tops
saint peter's roman fane ; and th' other bones
of like proportion , so that from above
the bank , which girdled him below , such height
arose his stature , that three friezelanders
had striv'n in vain to reach but to his hair .
full thirty ample palms was he expos'd
downward from whence a man his garments loops .
" raphel bai ameth sabi almi , "
so shouted his fierce lips , which sweeter hymns
became not ; and my guide address'd him thus :
" o senseless spirit ! let thy horn for thee
interpret : therewith vent thy rage , if rage
or other passion wring thee . search thy neck ,
there shalt thou find the belt that binds it on .
wild spirit ! lo , upon thy mighty breast
where hangs the baldrick ! " then to me he spake :
" he doth accuse himself . nimrod is this ,
through whose ill counsel in the world no more
one tongue prevails . but pass we on , nor waste
our words ; for so each language is to him ,
as his to others , understood by none . "
then to the leftward turning sped we forth ,
and at a sling's throw found another shade
far fiercer and more huge . i cannot say
what master hand had girt him ; but he held
behind the right arm fetter'd , and before
the other with a chain , that fasten'd him
from the neck down , and five times round his form
apparent met the wreathed links . " this proud one
would of his strength against almighty jove
make trial , " said my guide ; " whence he is thus
requited : ephialtes him they call .
" great was his prowess , when the giants brought
fear on the gods : those arms , which then he piled ,
now moves he never . " forthwith i return'd :
" fain would i , if 't were possible , mine eyes
of briareus immeasurable gain'd
experience next . " he answer'd : " thou shalt see
not far from hence antaeus , who both speaks
and is unfetter'd , who shall place us there
where guilt is at its depth . far onward stands
whom thou wouldst fain behold , in chains , and made
like to this spirit , save that in his looks
more fell he seems . " by violent earthquake rock'd
ne'er shook a tow'r , so reeling to its base ,
as ephialtes . more than ever then
i dreaded death , nor than the terror more
had needed , if i had not seen the cords
that held him fast . we , straightway journeying on ,
came to antaeus , who five ells complete
without the head , forth issued from the cave .
" o thou , who in the fortunate vale , that made
great scipio heir of glory , when his sword
drove back the troop of hannibal in flight ,
who thence of old didst carry for thy spoil
an hundred lions ; and if thou hadst fought
in the high conflict on thy brethren's side ,
seems as men yet believ'd , that through thine arm
the sons of earth had conquer'd , now vouchsafe
to place us down beneath , where numbing cold
locks up cocytus . force not that we crave
or tityus' help or typhon's . here is one
can give what in this realm ye covet . stoop
therefore , nor scornfully distort thy lip .
he in the upper world can yet bestow
renown on thee , for he doth live , and looks
for life yet longer , if before the time
grace call him not unto herself . " thus spake
the teacher . he in haste forth stretch'd his hands ,
and caught my guide . alcides whilom felt
that grapple straighten'd score . soon as my guide
had felt it , he bespake me thus : " this way
that i may clasp thee ; " then so caught me up ,
that we were both one burden . as appears
the tower of carisenda , from beneath
where it doth lean , if chance a passing cloud
so sail across , that opposite it hangs ,
such then antaeus seem'd , as at mine ease
i mark'd him stooping . i were fain at times
t' have pass'd another way . yet in th' abyss ,
that lucifer with judas low ingulfs ,
lightly he plac'd us ; nor there leaning stay'd ,
but rose as in a bark the stately mast .
could i command rough rhimes and hoarse , to suit
that hole of sorrow , o'er which ev'ry rock
his firm abutment rears , then might the vein
of fancy rise full springing : but not mine
such measures , and with falt'ring awe i touch
the mighty theme ; for to describe the depth
of all the universe , is no emprize
to jest with , and demands a tongue not us'd
to infant babbling . but let them assist
my song , the tuneful maidens , by whose aid
amphion wall'd in thebes , so with the truth
my speech shall best accord . oh ill - starr'd folk ,
beyond all others wretched ! who abide
in such a mansion , as scarce thought finds words
to speak of , better had ye here on earth
been flocks or mountain goats . as down we stood
in the dark pit beneath the giants' feet ,
but lower far than they , and i did gaze
still on the lofty battlement , a voice
bespoke me thus : " look how thou walkest . take
good heed , thy soles do tread not on the heads
of thy poor brethren . " thereupon i turn'd ,
and saw before and underneath my feet
a lake , whose frozen surface liker seem'd
to glass than water . not so thick a veil
in winter e'er hath austrian danube spread
o'er his still course , nor tanais far remote
under the chilling sky . roll'd o'er that mass
had tabernich or pietrapana fall'n ,
not e'en its rim had creak'd . as peeps the frog
croaking above the wave , what time in dreams
the village gleaner oft pursues her toil ,
so , to where modest shame appears , thus low
blue pinch'd and shrin'd in ice the spirits stood ,
moving their teeth in shrill note like the stork .
his face each downward held ; their mouth the cold ,
their eyes express'd the dolour of their heart .
a space i look'd around , then at my feet
saw two so strictly join'd , that of their head
the very hairs were mingled . " tell me ye ,
whose bosoms thus together press , " said i ,
" who are ye ? " at that sound their necks they bent ,
and when their looks were lifted up to me ,
straightway their eyes , before all moist within ,
distill'd upon their lips , and the frost bound
the tears betwixt those orbs and held them there .
plank unto plank hath never cramp clos'd up
so stoutly . whence like two enraged goats
they clash'd together ; them such fury seiz'd .
and one , from whom the cold both ears had reft ,
exclaim'd , still looking downward : " why on us
dost speculate so long ? if thou wouldst know
who are these two , the valley , whence his wave
bisenzio slopes , did for its master own
their sire alberto , and next him themselves .
they from one body issued ; and throughout
caina thou mayst search , nor find a shade
more worthy in congealment to be fix'd ,
not him , whose breast and shadow arthur's land
at that one blow dissever'd , not focaccia ,
no not this spirit , whose o'erjutting head
obstructs my onward view : he bore the name
of mascheroni : tuscan if thou be ,
well knowest who he was : and to cut short
all further question , in my form behold
what once was camiccione . i await
carlino here my kinsman , whose deep guilt
shall wash out mine . " a thousand visages
then mark'd i , which the keen and eager cold
had shap'd into a doggish grin ; whence creeps
a shiv'ring horror o'er me , at the thought
of those frore shallows . while we journey'd on
toward the middle , at whose point unites
all heavy substance , and i trembling went
through that eternal chillness , i know not
if will it were or destiny , or chance ,
but , passing 'midst the heads , my foot did strike
with violent blow against the face of one .
" wherefore dost bruise me ? " weeping , he exclaim'd ,
" unless thy errand be some fresh revenge
for montaperto , wherefore troublest me ? "
i thus : " instructor , now await me here ,
that i through him may rid me of my doubt .
thenceforth what haste thou wilt . " the teacher paus'd ,
and to that shade i spake , who bitterly
still curs'd me in his wrath . " what art thou , speak ,
that railest thus on others ? " he replied :
" now who art thou , that smiting others' cheeks
through antenora roamest , with such force
as were past suff'rance , wert thou living still ? "
" and i am living , to thy joy perchance , "
was my reply , " if fame be dear to thee ,
that with the rest i may thy name enrol . "
" the contrary of what i covet most , "
said he , " thou tender'st : hence ; nor vex me more .
ill knowest thou to flatter in this vale . "
then seizing on his hinder scalp , i cried :
" name thee , or not a hair shall tarry here . "
" rend all away , " he answer'd , " yet for that
i will not tell nor show thee who i am ,
though at my head thou pluck a thousand times . "
now i had grasp'd his tresses , and stript off
more than one tuft , he barking , with his eyes
drawn in and downward , when another cried ,
" what ails thee , bocca ? sound not loud enough
thy chatt'ring teeth , but thou must bark outright ?
what devil wrings thee ? " -- " now , " said i , " be dumb ,
accursed traitor ! to thy shame of thee
true tidings will i bear . " -- " off , " he replied ,
" tell what thou list ; but as thou escape from hence
to speak of him whose tongue hath been so glib ,
forget not : here he wails the frenchman's gold .
'him of duera , ' thou canst say , 'i mark'd ,
where the starv'd sinners pine . ' if thou be ask'd
what other shade was with them , at thy side
is beccaria , whose red gorge distain'd
the biting axe of florence . farther on ,
if i misdeem not , soldanieri bides ,
with ganellon , and tribaldello , him
who op'd faenza when the people slept . "
we now had left him , passing on our way ,
when i beheld two spirits by the ice
pent in one hollow , that the head of one
was cowl unto the other ; and as bread
is raven'd up through hunger , th' uppermost
did so apply his fangs to th' other's brain ,
where the spine joins it . not more furiously
on menalippus' temples tydeus gnaw'd ,
than on that skull and on its garbage he .
" o thou who show'st so beastly sign of hate
'gainst him thou prey'st on , let me hear , " said i
" the cause , on such condition , that if right
warrant thy grievance , knowing who ye are ,
and what the colour of his sinning was ,
i may repay thee in the world above ,
if that , wherewith i speak be moist so long . "
his jaws uplifting from their fell repast ,
that sinner wip'd them on the hairs o' th' head ,
which he behind had mangled , then began :
" thy will obeying , i call up afresh
sorrow past cure , which but to think of wrings
my heart , or ere i tell on't . but if words ,
that i may utter , shall prove seed to bear
fruit of eternal infamy to him ,
the traitor whom i gnaw at , thou at once
shalt see me speak and weep . who thou mayst be
i know not , nor how here below art come :
but florentine thou seemest of a truth ,
when i do hear thee . know i was on earth
count ugolino , and th' archbishop he
ruggieri . why i neighbour him so close ,
now list . that through effect of his ill thoughts
in him my trust reposing , i was ta'en
and after murder'd , need is not i tell .
what therefore thou canst not have heard , that is ,
how cruel was the murder , shalt thou hear ,
and know if he have wrong'd me . a small grate
within that mew , which for my sake the name
of famine bears , where others yet must pine ,
already through its opening sev'ral moons
had shown me , when i slept the evil sleep ,
that from the future tore the curtain off .
this one , methought , as master of the sport ,
rode forth to chase the gaunt wolf and his whelps
unto the mountain , which forbids the sight
of lucca to the pisan . with lean brachs
inquisitive and keen , before him rang'd
lanfranchi with sismondi and gualandi .
after short course the father and the sons
seem'd tir'd and lagging , and methought i saw
the sharp tusks gore their sides . when i awoke
before the dawn , amid their sleep i heard
my sons ( for they were with me ) weep and ask
for bread . right cruel art thou , if no pang
thou feel at thinking what my heart foretold ;
and if not now , why use thy tears to flow ?
now had they waken'd ; and the hour drew near
when they were wont to bring us food ; the mind
of each misgave him through his dream , and i
heard , at its outlet underneath lock'd up
the' horrible tower : whence uttering not a word
i look'd upon the visage of my sons .
i wept not : so all stone i felt within .
they wept : and one , my little anslem , cried :
" thou lookest so ! father what ails thee ? " yet
i shed no tear , nor answer'd all that day
nor the next night , until another sun
came out upon the world . when a faint beam
had to our doleful prison made its way ,
and in four countenances i descry'd
the image of my own , on either hand
through agony i bit , and they who thought
i did it through desire of feeding , rose
o' th' sudden , and cried , 'father , we should grieve
far less , if thou wouldst eat of us : thou gav'st
these weeds of miserable flesh we wear ,
'and do thou strip them off from us again . '
then , not to make them sadder , i kept down
my spirit in stillness . that day and the next
we all were silent . ah , obdurate earth !
why open'dst not upon us ? when we came
to the fourth day , then geddo at my feet
outstretch'd did fling him , crying , 'hast no help
for me , my father ! ' there he died , and e'en
plainly as thou seest me , saw i the three
fall one by one 'twixt the fifth day and sixth :
" whence i betook me now grown blind to grope
over them all , and for three days aloud
call'd on them who were dead . then fasting got
the mastery of grief . " thus having spoke ,
once more upon the wretched skull his teeth
he fasten'd , like a mastiff's 'gainst the bone
firm and unyielding . oh thou pisa ! shame
of all the people , who their dwelling make
in that fair region , where th' italian voice
is heard , since that thy neighbours are so slack
to punish , from their deep foundations rise
capraia and gorgona , and dam up
the mouth of arno , that each soul in thee
may perish in the waters ! what if fame
reported that thy castles were betray'd
by ugolino , yet no right hadst thou
to stretch his children on the rack . for them ,
brigata , ugaccione , and the pair
of gentle ones , of whom my song hath told ,
their tender years , thou modern thebes ! did make
uncapable of guilt . onward we pass'd ,
where others skarf'd in rugged folds of ice
not on their feet were turn'd , but each revers'd .
there very weeping suffers not to weep ;
for at their eyes grief seeking passage finds
impediment , and rolling inward turns
for increase of sharp anguish : the first tears
hang cluster'd , and like crystal vizors show ,
under the socket brimming all the cup .
now though the cold had from my face dislodg'd
each feeling , as 't were callous , yet me seem'd
some breath of wind i felt . " whence cometh this , "
said i , " my master ? is not here below
all vapour quench'd ? " -- " 'thou shalt be speedily , "
he answer'd , " where thine eye shall tell thee whence
the cause descrying of this airy shower . "
then cried out one in the chill crust who mourn'd :
" o souls so cruel ! that the farthest post
hath been assign'd you , from this face remove
the harden'd veil , that i may vent the grief
impregnate at my heart , some little space
ere it congeal again ! " i thus replied :
" say who thou wast , if thou wouldst have mine aid ;
and if i extricate thee not , far down
as to the lowest ice may i descend ! "
" the friar alberigo , " answered he ,
" am i , who from the evil garden pluck'd
its fruitage , and am here repaid , the date
more luscious for my fig . " -- " hah ! " i exclaim'd ,
" art thou too dead ! " -- " how in the world aloft
it fareth with my body , " answer'd he ,
" i am right ignorant . such privilege
hath ptolomea , that ofttimes the soul
drops hither , ere by atropos divorc'd .
and that thou mayst wipe out more willingly
the glazed tear - drops that o'erlay mine eyes ,
know that the soul , that moment she betrays ,
as i did , yields her body to a fiend
who after moves and governs it at will ,
till all its time be rounded ; headlong she
falls to this cistern . and perchance above
doth yet appear the body of a ghost ,
who here behind me winters . him thou know'st ,
if thou but newly art arriv'd below .
the years are many that have pass'd away ,
since to this fastness branca doria came . "
" now , " answer'd i , " methinks thou mockest me ,
for branca doria never yet hath died ,
but doth all natural functions of a man ,
eats , drinks , and sleeps , and putteth raiment on . "
he thus : " not yet unto that upper foss
by th' evil talons guarded , where the pitch
tenacious boils , had michael zanche reach'd ,
when this one left a demon in his stead
in his own body , and of one his kin ,
who with him treachery wrought . but now put forth
thy hand , and ope mine eyes . " i op'd them not .
ill manners were best courtesy to him .
ah genoese ! men perverse in every way ,
with every foulness stain'd , why from the earth
are ye not cancel'd ? such an one of yours
i with romagna's darkest spirit found ,
as for his doings even now in soul
is in cocytus plung'd , and yet doth seem
in body still alive upon the earth .
" the banners of hell's monarch do come forth
towards us ; therefore look , " so spake my guide ,
" if thou discern him . " as , when breathes a cloud
heavy and dense , or when the shades of night
fall on our hemisphere , seems view'd from far
a windmill , which the blast stirs briskly round ,
such was the fabric then methought i saw ,
to shield me from the wind , forthwith i drew
behind my guide : no covert else was there .
now came i ( and with fear i bid my strain
record the marvel ) where the souls were all
whelm'd underneath , transparent , as through glass
pellucid the frail stem . some prone were laid ,
others stood upright , this upon the soles ,
that on his head , a third with face to feet
arch'd like a bow . when to the point we came ,
whereat my guide was pleas'd that i should see
the creature eminent in beauty once ,
he from before me stepp'd and made me pause .
" lo ! " he exclaim'd , " lo dis ! and lo the place ,
where thou hast need to arm thy heart with strength . "
how frozen and how faint i then became ,
ask me not , reader ! for i write it not ,
since words would fail to tell thee of my state .
i was not dead nor living . think thyself
if quick conception work in thee at all ,
how i did feel . that emperor , who sways
the realm of sorrow , at mid breast from th' ice
stood forth ; and i in stature am more like
a giant , than the giants are in his arms .
mark now how great that whole must be , which suits
with such a part . if he were beautiful
as he is hideous now , and yet did dare
to scowl upon his maker , well from him
may all our mis'ry flow . oh what a sight !
how passing strange it seem'd , when i did spy
upon his head three faces : one in front
of hue vermilion , th' other two with this
midway each shoulder join'd and at the crest ;
the right 'twixt wan and yellow seem'd : the left
to look on , such as come from whence old nile
stoops to the lowlands . under each shot forth
two mighty wings , enormous as became
a bird so vast . sails never such i saw
outstretch'd on the wide sea . no plumes had they ,
but were in texture like a bat , and these
he flapp'd i' th' air , that from him issued still
three winds , wherewith cocytus to its depth
was frozen . at six eyes he wept : the tears
adown three chins distill'd with bloody foam .
at every mouth his teeth a sinner champ'd
bruis'd as with pond'rous engine , so that three
were in this guise tormented . but far more
than from that gnawing , was the foremost pang'd
by the fierce rending , whence ofttimes the back
was stript of all its skin . " that upper spirit ,
who hath worse punishment , " so spake my guide ,
" is judas , he that hath his head within
and plies the feet without . of th' other two ,
whose heads are under , from the murky jaw
who hangs , is brutus : lo ! how he doth writhe
and speaks not ! th' other cassius , that appears
so large of limb . but night now re - ascends ,
and it is time for parting . all is seen . "
i clipp'd him round the neck , for so he bade ;
and noting time and place , he , when the wings
enough were op'd , caught fast the shaggy sides ,
and down from pile to pile descending stepp'd
between the thick fell and the jagged ice .
soon as he reach'd the point , whereat the thigh
upon the swelling of the haunches turns ,
my leader there with pain and struggling hard
turn'd round his head , where his feet stood before ,
and grappled at the fell , as one who mounts ,
that into hell methought we turn'd again .
" expect that by such stairs as these , " thus spake
the teacher , panting like a man forespent ,
" we must depart from evil so extreme . "
then at a rocky opening issued forth ,
and plac'd me on a brink to sit , next join'd
with wary step my side . i rais'd mine eyes ,
believing that i lucifer should see
where he was lately left , but saw him now
with legs held upward . let the grosser sort ,
who see not what the point was i had pass'd ,
bethink them if sore toil oppress'd me then .
" arise , " my master cried , " upon thy feet .
the way is long , and much uncouth the road ;
and now within one hour and half of noon
the sun returns . " it was no palace - hall
lofty and luminous wherein we stood ,
but natural dungeon where ill footing was
and scant supply of light . " ere from th' abyss
i sep'rate , " thus when risen i began ,
" my guide ! vouchsafe few words to set me free
from error's thralldom . where is now the ice ?
how standeth he in posture thus revers'd ?
and how from eve to morn in space so brief
hath the sun made his transit ? " he in few
thus answering spake : " thou deemest thou art still
on th' other side the centre , where i grasp'd
th' abhorred worm , that boreth through the world .
thou wast on th' other side , so long as i
descended ; when i turn'd , thou didst o'erpass
that point , to which from ev'ry part is dragg'd
all heavy substance . thou art now arriv'd
under the hemisphere opposed to that ,
which the great continent doth overspread ,
and underneath whose canopy expir'd
the man , that was born sinless , and so liv'd .
thy feet are planted on the smallest sphere ,
whose other aspect is judecca . morn
here rises , when there evening sets : and he ,
whose shaggy pile was scal'd , yet standeth fix'd ,
as at the first . on this part he fell down
from heav'n ; and th' earth , here prominent before ,
through fear of him did veil her with the sea ,
and to our hemisphere retir'd . perchance
to shun him was the vacant space left here
by what of firm land on this side appears ,
that sprang aloof . " there is a place beneath ,
from belzebub as distant , as extends
the vaulted tomb , discover'd not by sight ,
but by the sound of brooklet , that descends
this way along the hollow of a rock ,
which , as it winds with no precipitous course ,
the wave hath eaten . by that hidden way
my guide and i did enter , to return
to the fair world : and heedless of repose
we climbed , he first , i following his steps ,
till on our view the beautiful lights of heav'n
dawn'd through a circular opening in the cave :
thus issuing we again beheld the stars .
